
                               _PART II_
                                 DREAMS




                             FIFTH LECTURE
          DIFFICULTIES AND PRELIMINARY APPROACH TO THE SUBJECT


One day the discovery was made that the symptoms of disease in certain
nervous patients have meaning.[25] It was upon this discovery that the
psycho-analytic method of treatment was based. In this treatment it
happened that patients in speaking of their symptoms also mentioned
their dreams, whereupon the suspicion arose that these dreams too had
meaning.

However, we will not pursue this histoxrical path, but will strike off in
the opposite direction. Our aim is to demonstrate the meaning of dreams,
in preparation for the study of the neuroses. There are good grounds for
this reversal of procedure, since the study of dreams is not merely the
best preparation for that of the neuroses, but a dream is itself a
neurotic symptom and, moreover, one which possesses for us the
incalculable advantage of occurring in all healthy people. Indeed, if
all human beings were healthy and would only dream, we could gather
almost all the knowledge from their dreams which we have gained from
studying the neuroses.

So dreams become the object of psycho-analytic research—another of these
ordinary, under-rated occurrences, apparently of no practical value,
like “errors,” and sharing with them the characteristic of occurring in
healthy persons. But in other respects the conditions of work are rather
less favourable. Errors had only been neglected by science, people had
not troubled their heads much about them, but at least it was no
disgrace to occupy oneself with them. True, people said, there are
things more important but still something may possibly come of it. To
occupy oneself with dreams, however, is not merely unpractical and
superfluous, but positively scandalous: it carries with it the taint of
the unscientific and arouses the suspicion of personal leanings towards
mysticism. The idea of a medical student troubling himself about dreams
when there is so much in neuropathology and psychiatry itself that is
more serious, tumours as large as apples compressing the organ of the
mind, hæmorrhages, chronic inflammatory conditions in which the
alterations in the tissues can be demonstrated under the microscope! No,
dreams are far too unworthy and trivial to be objects of scientific
research.

There is yet another factor involved which, in itself, sets at defiance
all the requirements of exact investigation. In investigating dreams
even the object of research, the dream itself, is indefinite. A
delusion, for example, presents clear and definite outlines. “I am the
Emperor of China,” says your patient plainly. But a dream? For the most
part it cannot be related at all. When a man tells a dream, has he any
guarantee that he has told it correctly, and not perhaps altered it in
the telling or been forced to invent part of it on account of the
vagueness of his recollection? Most dreams cannot be remembered at all
and are forgotten except for some tiny fragments. And is a scientific
psychology or a method of treatment for the sick to be founded upon
material such as this?

A certain element of exaggeration in a criticism may arouse our
suspicions. The arguments brought against the dream as an object of
scientific research are clearly extreme. We have met with the objection
of triviality already in “errors,” and have told ourselves that great
things may be revealed even by small indications. As to the
indistinctness of dreams, that is a characteristic like any other—we
cannot dictate to things their characteristics; besides, there are also
dreams which are clear and well defined. Further, there are other
objects of psychiatric investigation which suffer in the same way from
the quality of indefiniteness, e.g. the obsessive ideas of many cases,
with which nevertheless many psychiatrists of repute and standing have
occupied themselves. I will recall the last case of the kind which came
before me in medical practice. The patient, a woman, presented her case
in these words: “I have a certain feeling, as if I had injured, or had
meant to injure, some living creature—perhaps a child—no, no, a dog
rather, as if perhaps I had pushed it off a bridge—or done something
else.” Any disadvantage resulting from the uncertain recollection of
dreams may be remedied by deciding that exactly what the dreamer tells
is to count as the dream, and by ignoring all that he may have forgotten
or altered in the process of recollection. Finally, one cannot maintain
in so sweeping a fashion that dreams are unimportant things. We know
from our own experience that the mood in which we awake from a dream may
last throughout the day, and cases have been observed by medical men in
which mental disorder began with a dream, the delusion which had its
source in this dream persisting; further, it is told of historical
persons that impulses to momentous deeds sprang from their dreams. We
may therefore ask: what is the real cause of the disdain in which dreams
are held in scientific circles? In my opinion it is the reaction from
the overestimation of them in earlier times. It is well known that it is
no easy matter to reconstruct the past, but we may assume with certainty
(you will forgive my jest) that as early as three thousand years ago and
more our ancestors dreamt in the same way as we do. So far as we know,
all ancient peoples attached great significance to dreams and regarded
them as of practical value; they obtained from them auguries of the
future and looked for portents in them. For the Greeks and other
Orientals, it was at times as unthinkable to undertake a campaign
without a dream-interpreter as it would be to-day without air-scouts for
intelligence. When Alexander the Great set out on his campaign of
conquest the most famous interpreters of dreams were in his following.
The city of Tyre, still at that time on an island, offered so stout a
resistance to the king that he entertained the idea of abandoning the
siege; then one night he dreamed of a satyr dancing in triumph, and when
he related this dream to his interpreters they informed him that it
foretold his victory over the city; he gave the order to attack and took
Tyre by storm. Among the Etruscans and Romans other methods of
foretelling the future were employed, but during the whole of the
Græco-Roman period the interpretation of dreams was practised and held
in high esteem. Of the literature on this subject the principal work at
any rate has come down to us, namely, the book of Artemidorus of Daldis,
who is said to have lived at the time of the Emperor Hadrian. How it
happened that the art of dream-interpretation declined later and dreams
fell into disrepute, I cannot tell you. The progress of learning cannot
have had very much to do with it, for in the darkness of the middle ages
things far more absurd than the ancient practice of the interpretation
of dreams were faithfully retained. The fact remains that the interest
in dreams gradually sank to the level of superstition and could hold its
own only amongst the uneducated. In our day, there survive, as a final
degradation of the art of dream-interpretation, the attempts to find out
from dreams numbers destined to draw prizes in games of chance. On the
other hand, exact science of the present day has repeatedly concerned
itself with the dream, but always with the sole object of illustrating
_physiological_ theories. By medical men, naturally, a dream was never
regarded as a mental process but as the mental expression of physical
stimuli. Binz in 1876 pronounced the dream to be “a physical process,
always useless and in many cases actually morbid, a process above which
the conception of the world-soul and of immortality stands as high as
does the blue sky above the most low-lying, weed-grown stretch of sand.”
Maury compares dreams with the spasmodic jerkings of St. Vitus’ dance,
contrasted with the co-ordinated movements of the normal human being; in
an old comparison a parallel is drawn between the content of a dream and
the sounds which would be produced if “someone ignorant of music let his
ten fingers wander over the keys of an instrument.”

‘Interpretation’ means discovering a hidden meaning, but there can be no
question of attempting this while such an attitude is maintained towards
the dream-performance. Look up the description of dreams given in the
writings of Wundt, Jodl and other recent philosophers: they are content
with the bare enumeration of the divergences of the dream-life from
waking thought with a view to depreciating the dreams; they emphasize
the lack of connection in the associations, the suspended exercise of
the critical faculty, the elimination of all knowledge, and other
indications of diminished functioning. The single valuable contribution
to our knowledge about dreams for which we are indebted to exact science
relates to the influence upon the dream-content of physical stimuli
operating during sleep. We have the work of a Norwegian author who died
recently—J. Mourly Vold—two large volumes on experimental investigation
of dreams (translated into German in 1910 and 1912), which are concerned
almost entirely with the results obtained by change in the position of
the limbs. These investigations have been held up to us as models of
exact research in the subject of dreams. Now can you imagine what would
be the comment of exact science on learning that we intend to try to
find out the _meaning_ of dreams? The comment that has perhaps been made
already! However, we will not allow ourselves to be appalled at the
thought. If it was possible for errors to have an underlying meaning, it
is possible that dreams have one too; and errors have, in very many
cases, a meaning which has eluded the researches of exact science. Let
us adopt the assumption of the ancients and of simple folk, and follow
in the footsteps of the dream-interpreters of old.

First of all, we must take our bearings in this enterprise, and make a
survey of the field of dreams. What exactly is a dream? It is difficult
to define it in a single phrase. Yet we need not seek after a
definition, when all we need is to refer to something familiar to
everyone. Still we ought to pick out the essential features in dreams.
How are we to discover these features? The boundaries of the region we
are entering comprise such vast differences, differences whichever way
we turn. That which we can show to be common to all dreams is probably
what is essential.

Well then—the first common characteristic of all dreams would be that we
are asleep at the time. Obviously, the dream is the life of the mind
during sleep, a life bearing certain resemblances to our waking life
and, at the same time, differing from it widely. That, indeed, was
Aristotle’s definition. Perhaps dream and sleep stand in yet closer
relationship to each other. We can be waked by a dream; we often have a
dream when we wake spontaneously or when we are forcibly roused from
sleep. Dreams seem thus to be an intermediate condition between sleeping
and waking. Hence, our attention is directed to sleep itself: what then
is sleep?

That is a physiological or biological problem concerning which much is
still in dispute. We can come to no decisive answer, but I think we may
attempt to define one psychological characteristic of sleep. Sleep is a
condition in which I refuse to have anything to do with the outer world
and have withdrawn my interest from it. I go to sleep by retreating from
the outside world and warding off the stimuli proceeding from it. Again,
when I am tired by that world I go to sleep. I say to it as I fall
asleep: “Leave me in peace, for I want to sleep.” The child says just
the opposite: “I won’t go to sleep yet; I’m not tired, I want more
things to happen to me!” Thus the biological object of sleep seems to be
recuperation, its psychological characteristic the suspension of
interest in the outer world. Our relationship with the world which we
entered so unwillingly seems to be endurable only with intermission;
hence we withdraw again periodically into the condition prior to our
entrance into the world: that is to say, into intra-uterine existence.
At any rate, we try to bring about quite similar conditions—warmth,
darkness and absence of stimulus—characteristic of that state. Some of
us still roll ourselves tightly up into a ball resembling the
intra-uterine position. It looks as if we grown-ups do not belong wholly
to the world, but only by two-thirds; one-third of us has never yet been
born at all. Every time we wake in the morning it is as if we were newly
born. We do, in fact, speak of the condition of waking from sleep in
these very words: we feel “as if we were newly born,”—and in this we are
probably quite mistaken in our idea of the general sensations of the
new-born infant; it may be assumed on the contrary that it feels
extremely uncomfortable. Again, in speaking of birth we speak of “seeing
the light of day.”

If this is the nature of sleep, then dreams do not come into its scheme
at all, but seem rather to be an unwelcome supplement to it; and we do
indeed believe that dreamless sleep is the best, the only proper sleep.
There should be no mental activity during sleep; if any such activity
bestirs itself, then in so far have we failed to reach the true
pre-natal condition of peace; we have not been able to avoid altogether
some remnants of mental activity, and the act of dreaming would
represent these remnants. In that event it really does seem that dreams
do not need to have meaning. With errors it was different, for they were
at least activities manifested in waking life; but if I sleep and have
altogether suspended mental activity, with the exception of certain
remnants which I have not been able to suppress, there is no necessity
whatever that they should have any meaning. In fact, I cannot even make
use of any such meaning, seeing that the rest of my mind is asleep. It
can really then be a matter of spasmodic reactions only, of such mental
phenomena only as have their origin in physical stimulation. Hence,
dreams must be remnants of the mental activity of waking life disturbing
sleep, and we might as well make up our minds forthwith to abandon a
theme so unsuited to the purposes of psycho-analysis.

Superfluous as dreams may be, however, they do exist nevertheless, and
we can try to account for their existence to ourselves. Why does not
mental life go off to sleep? Probably because there is something that
will not leave the mind in peace; stimuli are acting upon it and to
these it is bound to react. Dreams therefore are the mode of reaction of
the mind to stimuli acting upon it during sleep. We note here a
possibility of access to comprehension of dreams. We can now endeavour
to find out, in various dreams, what are the stimuli seeking to disturb
sleep, the reaction to which takes the form of dreams. By doing this we
should have worked out the first characteristic common to all dreams.

Is there any other common characteristic? Yes, there is another,
unmistakable, and yet much harder to lay hold of and describe. The
character of mental processes during sleep is quite different from that
of waking processes. In dreams we go through many experiences, which we
fully believe in, whereas in reality we are perhaps only experiencing
the single disturbing stimulus. For the most part our experiences take
the form of visual images; there may be feeling as well, thoughts, too,
mixed up with them, and the other senses may be drawn in; but for the
most part dreams consist of visual images. Part of the difficulty of
reciting a dream comes from the fact that we have to translate these
images into words. “I could draw it,” the dreamer often says to us, “but
I do not know how to put it into words.” Now this is not exactly a
diminution in the mental capacity, as seen in a contrast between a
feeble-minded person and a man of genius. The difference is rather a
qualitative one, but it is difficult to say precisely wherein it lies.
G. T. Fechner once suggested that the stage whereon the drama of the
dream (within the mind) is played out is other than that of the life of
waking ideas. That is a saying which we really do not understand, nor do
we know what it is meant to convey to us, but it does actually reproduce
the impression of strangeness which most dreams make upon us. Again, the
comparison of the act of dreaming with the performances of an unskilled
hand in music breaks down here, for the piano will certainly respond
with the same notes, though not with melodies, to a chance touch on its
keys. We will keep this second common characteristic of dreams carefully
in view, even though we may not understand it.

Are there any other qualities common to all dreams? I can think of none,
but can see differences only, whichever way I look, differences too in
every respect—in apparent duration, definiteness, the part played by
affects, persistence in the mind, and so forth. This is really not what
we should naturally expect in the case of a compulsive attempt, at once
meagre and convulsive, to ward off a stimulus. As regards the length of
dreams, some are very short, containing only one image, or very few, or
a single thought, possibly even a single word; others are peculiarly
rich in content, enact entire romances and seem to last a very long
time. There are dreams as distinct as actual experiences, so distinct
that for some time after waking we do not realize that they were dreams
at all; others, which are ineffably faint, shadowy and blurred; in one
and the same dream, even, there may be some parts of extraordinary
vividness alternating with others so indistinct as to be almost wholly
elusive. Again, dreams may be quite consistent or at any rate coherent,
or even witty or fantastically beautiful; others again are confused,
apparently imbecile, absurd or often absolutely mad. There are dreams
which leave us quite cold, others in which every affect makes itself
felt, pain to the point of tears, terror so intense as to wake us,
amazement, delight, and so on. Most dreams are forgotten soon after
waking; or they persist throughout the day, the recollection becoming
fainter and more imperfect as the day goes on; others remain so vivid
(as, for example, the dreams of childhood) that thirty years later we
remember them as clearly as though they were part of a recent
experience. Dreams, like people, may make their appearance once and
never come back; or the same person may dream the same thing repeatedly,
either in the same form or with slight alterations. In short, these
scraps of mental activity at night-time have at command an immense
repertory, can in fact create everything that by day the mind is capable
of—only, it is never the same.

One might attempt to account for these diversities in dreams by assuming
that they correspond to different intermediate states between sleeping
and waking, different levels of imperfect sleep. Very well; but then in
proportion as the mind approached the waking state there should be not
merely an increase in the value, content, and distinctness of the
dream-performance, but also a growing perception that it _is_ a dream;
and it ought not to happen that side by side with a clear and sensible
element in the dream there is one which is nonsensical or indistinct,
followed again by a good piece of work. It is certain that the mind
could not vary its depth of sleep so rapidly as that. This explanation
therefore does not help; there is in fact no short cut to an answer.

For the present we will leave the ‘meaning’ of the dream out of
question, and try instead, by starting from the common element in
dreams, to clear a path to a better understanding of their nature. From
the relationship of dreams to sleep we have drawn the conclusion that
dreams are the reaction to a stimulus disturbing sleep. As we have
heard, this is also the single point at which exact experimental
psychology can come to our aid; it affords proof of the fact that
stimuli brought to bear during sleep make their appearance in dreams.
Many investigations have been made on these lines, culminating in those
of Mourly Vold whom I mentioned earlier; we have all, too, been in a
position to confirm their results by occasional observations of our own.
I will choose some of the earlier experiments to tell you. Maury had
tests of this kind carried out upon himself. Whilst dreaming, he was
made to smell some eau de Cologne, whereupon he dreamt he was in Cairo,
in the shop of Johann Maria Farina, and this was followed by further
crazy adventures. Again, someone gave his neck a gentle pinch, and he
dreamt of the application of a blister and of a doctor who had treated
him when he was a child. Again, they let a drop of water fall on his
forehead and he was immediately in Italy, perspiring freely and drinking
the white wine of Orvieto.

The striking feature about these dreams produced under experimental
conditions will perhaps become still clearer to us in another series of
“stimulus”-dreams. These are three dreams of which we have an account by
a clever observer, Hildebrandt, and all three are reactions to the sound
of an alarum-clock:

“I am going for a walk on a spring morning, and I saunter through fields
just beginning to grow green, till I come to a neighbouring village,
where I see the inhabitants in holiday attire making their way in large
numbers to the church, their hymn-books in their hands. Of course! it is
Sunday and the morning service is just about to begin. I decide to take
part in it, but first as I am rather overheated I think I will cool down
in the churchyard which surrounds the church. Whilst reading some of the
epitaphs there I hear the bell-ringer go up into the tower, where I now
notice, high up, the little village bell which will give the signal for
the beginning of the service. For some time yet it remains motionless,
then it begins to swing, and suddenly the strokes ring out, clear and
piercing—so clear and piercing that they put an end to my sleep. But the
sound of the bell comes from the alarum-clock.”

Here is another combination of images. “It is a bright winter day, and
the roads are deep in snow. I have promised to take part in a sleighing
expedition, but I have to wait a long time before I am told that the
sleigh is at the door. Now follow the preparations for getting in, the
fur rug is spread out and the foot-muff fetched and finally I am in my
place. But there is still a delay while the horses wait for the signal
to start. Then the reins are jerked and the little bells, shaken
violently, begin their familiar janizary music, so loudly that in a
moment the web of the dream is rent. Again it is nothing but the shrill
sound of the alarum-clock.”

Now for the third example! “I see a kitchen-maid with dozens of piled-up
plates going along the passage to the dining-room. It seems to me that
the pyramid of china in her arms is in danger of overbalancing. I call
out a warning: ‘Take care, your whole load will fall to the ground.’ Of
course I receive the usual answer: that they are accustomed to carrying
china in that way, and so on; meanwhile I follow her as she goes with
anxious looks. I thought so—the next thing is a stumble on the
threshold, the crockery falls, crashing and clattering in a hundred
pieces on the ground. But—I soon become aware that that interminably
prolonged sound is no real crash, but a regular ringing—and this ringing
is due merely to the alarum-clock, as I realize at last on awakening.”

These dreams are very pretty, perfectly sensible, and by no means so
incoherent as dreams usually are. We have no quarrel with them on those
grounds. The thing common to them all is that in each case the situation
arises from a noise, which the dreamer on waking recognizes as that of
the alarum-clock. Hence we see here how a dream is produced, but we find
out something more. In the dream there is no recognition of the clock,
which does not even appear in it, but for the noise of the clock another
noise is substituted; the stimulus which disturbs sleep is interpreted,
but interpreted differently in each instance. Now why is this? There is
no answer; it appears to be mere caprice. But to understand the dream we
should be able to account for its choice of just this noise and no other
to interpret the stimulus given by the alarum-clock. In analogous
fashion we must object to Maury’s experiments that, although it is clear
that the stimulus brought to bear on the sleeper does appear in the
dream, yet his experiments don’t explain why it appears exactly in that
form, which is one that does not seem explicable by the nature of the
stimulus disturbing sleep. And further, in Maury’s experiments there was
mostly a mass of other dream-material attached to the direct result of
the stimulus, for example, the crazy adventures in the eau de Cologne
dream, for which we are at a loss to account.

Now will you reflect that the class of dreams which wake one up affords
the best opportunity for establishing the influence of external
disturbing stimuli. In most other cases it will be more difficult. We do
not wake up out of all dreams, and if in the morning we remember a dream
of the night before, how are we to assign it to a disturbing stimulus
operating perhaps during the night? I once succeeded in subsequently
establishing the occurrence of a sound-stimulus of this sort, but only,
of course, because of peculiar circumstances. I woke up one morning at a
place in the Tyrolese mountains knowing that I had dreamt that the Pope
was dead. I could not explain the dream to myself, but later my wife
asked me: “Did you hear quite early this morning the dreadful noise of
bells breaking out in all the churches and chapels?” No, I had heard
nothing, my sleep is too sound, but thanks to her telling me this I
understood my dream. How often may such causes of stimulus as this
induce dreams in the sleeper without his ever hearing of them
afterwards? Possibly very often: and possibly not. If we can get no
information of any stimulus we cannot be convinced on the point. And
apart from this we have given up trying to arrive at an estimation of
the sleep-disturbing external stimuli, since we know that they only
explain a fragment of the dream and not the whole dream-reaction.

We need not on that account give up this theory altogether; there is
still another possible way of following it out. Obviously it is a matter
of indifference what disturbs sleep and causes the mind to dream. If it
cannot always be something external acting as a stimulus to one of the
senses, it is possible that, instead, a stimulus operates from the
internal organs—a so-called somatic stimulus. This supposition lies very
close, and moreover it corresponds to the view popularly held with
regard to the origin of dreams, for it is a common saying that they come
from the stomach. Unfortunately, here again we must suppose that in very
many cases information respecting a somatic stimulus operating during
the night would no longer be forthcoming after waking, so that it would
be incapable of proof. But we will not overlook the fact that many
trustworthy experiences support the idea that dreams may be derived from
somatic stimuli; on the whole it is indubitable that the condition of
the internal organs can influence dreams. The relation of the content of
many dreams to distention of the bladder or to a condition of excitation
of the sex-organs is so plain that it cannot be mistaken. From these
obvious cases we pass to others, in which, to judge by the content of
the dream, we are at least justified in suspecting that some such
somatic stimuli have been at work, since there is something in this
content which can be regarded as elaboration, representation, or
interpretation of these stimuli. Scherner, the investigator of dreams
(1861), emphatically supported the view which traces the origin of
dreams to organic stimuli, and contributed some excellent examples
towards it. For instance, he sees in a dream “two rows of beautiful
boys, with fair hair and delicate complexions, confronting each other
pugnaciously, joining in combat, seizing hold of one another, and again
letting go their hold, only to take up the former position and go
through the whole process again”; his interpretation of the two rows of
boys as the teeth is in itself plausible and seems to receive full
confirmation when after this scene the dreamer “pulls a long tooth from
his jaw.” Again, the interpretation of “long, narrow, winding passages”
as being suggested by a stimulus originating in the intestine seems
sound and corroborates Scherner’s assertion that dreams primarily
endeavour to represent, by like objects, the organ from which the
stimulus proceeds.

We must therefore be prepared to admit that internal stimuli can play
the same rôle in dreams as external ones. Unfortunately, evaluation of
this factor is open to the same objections. In a great number of
instances the attribution of dreams to somatic stimuli must remain
uncertain or incapable of proof; not all dreams, but only a certain
number of them, rouse the suspicion that stimuli from internal organs
have something to do with their origin; and lastly, the internal somatic
stimulus will suffice no more than the external sensory stimulus to
explain any other part of the dream than the direct reaction to it. The
origin of all the rest of the dream remains obscure.

Now, however, let us direct our attention to a certain peculiarity of
the dream-life which appears when we study the operation of these
stimuli. The dream does not merely reproduce the stimulus, but
elaborates it, plays upon it, fits it into a context, or replaces it by
something else. This is a side of the dream-work which is bound to be of
interest to us because possibly it may lead us nearer to the true nature
of dreams. The scope of a man’s production is not necessarily limited to
the circumstance which immediately gives rise to it. For instance,
Shakespeare’s _Macbeth_ was written as an occasional drama on the
accession of the king who first united in his person the crowns of the
three kingdoms. But does this historical occasion cover the whole
content of the drama, or explain its grandeur and its mystery? Perhaps
in the same way the external and internal stimuli operating upon the
sleeper are merely the occasion of the dream and afford us no insight
into its true nature.

The other element common to all dreams, their peculiarity in mental
life, is on the one hand very difficult to grasp and on the other seems
to afford no clue for further inquiry. Our experiences in dreams for the
most part take the form of visual images. Can these be explained by the
stimuli? Is it really the stimulus that we experience? If so, why is the
experience visual, when it can only be in the very rarest instance that
any stimulus has operated upon our eyesight? Or, can it be shown that
when we dream of speech any conversation or sounds resembling
conversation reached our ears during sleep? I venture to discard such a
possibility without any hesitation whatever.

If we cannot get any further with the common characteristics of dreams
as a starting-point, let us try beginning with their differences. Dreams
are often meaningless, confused, and absurd, yet there are some which
are sensible, sober, and reasonable. Let us see whether these latter
sensible dreams can help to elucidate those which are meaningless. I
will tell you the latest reasonable dream which was told to me, the
dream of a young man: “I went for a walk in the Kärntnerstrasse and
there I met Mr. X.; after accompanying him for a short time I went into
a restaurant. Two ladies and a gentleman came and sat down at my table.
At first I was annoyed and refused to look at them, but presently I
glanced across at them and found that they were quite nice.” The
dreamer’s comment on this was that the evening before he had actually
been walking in the Kärntnerstrasse, which is the way he usually goes,
and that he had met Mr. X. there. The other part of the dream was not a
direct reminiscence, but only bore a certain resemblance to an
occurrence of some time previously. Or here we have another prosaic
dream, that of a lady. “Her husband says to her: ‘Don’t you think we
ought to have the piano tuned?’ and she replies: ‘It is not worth it,
for the hammers need fresh leather anyhow.’” This dream repeats a
conversation which took place in almost the same words between herself
and her husband the day before the dream. What then do we learn from
these two prosaic dreams? Merely that there occur in them recollections
of daily life or of matters connected with it. Even that would be
something if it could be asserted of all dreams without exception. But
that is out of the question; this characteristic too belongs only to a
minority of dreams. In most dreams we find no connection with the day
before, and no light is thrown from this quarter upon meaningless and
absurd dreams. All we know is that we have met with a new problem. Not
only do we want to know what a dream is saying, but if as in our
examples that is quite plain, we want to know further from what cause
and to what end we repeat in dreams this which is known to us and has
recently happened to us.

I think you would be as tired as I of continuing the kind of attempts we
have made up to this point. It only shows that all the interest in the
world will not help us with a problem unless we have also an idea of
some path to adopt in order to arrive at a solution. Till now we have
not found this path. Experimental psychology has contributed nothing but
some (certainly very valuable) information about the significance of
stimuli in the production of dreams. Of philosophy we have nothing to
expect, unless it be a lofty repetition of the reproach that our object
is intellectually contemptible; while from the occult sciences we surely
do not choose to borrow. History and the verdict of the people tell us
that dreams are full of meaning and importance, and of prophetic
significance; but that is hard to accept and certainly does not lend
itself to proof. So then our first endeavours are completely baffled.

But unexpectedly there comes a hint from a direction in which we have
not hitherto looked. Colloquial speech, which is certainly no matter of
chance but the deposit, as it were, of ancient knowledge—a thing which
must not indeed be made too much of—our speech, I say, recognizes the
existence of something to which, strangely enough, it gives the name of
“day-dreams.” Day-dreams are phantasies (products of phantasy); they are
very common phenomena, are observable in healthy as well as in sick
persons, and they also can easily be studied by the subject himself. The
most striking thing about these ‘phantastic’ creations is that they have
received the name of “day-dreams,” for they have nothing in common with
the two universal characteristics of dreams. Their name contradicts any
relationship to the condition of sleep and, as regards the second
universal characteristic, no experience or hallucination takes place in
them, we simply imagine something; we recognize that they are the work
of phantasy, that we are not seeing but thinking. These day-dreams
appear before puberty, often indeed in late childhood, and persist until
maturity is reached when they are either given up or retained as long as
life lasts. The content of these phantasies is dictated by a very
transparent motivation. They are scenes and events which gratify either
the egoistic cravings of ambition or thirst for power, or the erotic
desires of the subject. In young men, ambitious phantasies predominate;
in women, whose ambition centres on success in love, erotic phantasies;
but the erotic requirement can often enough in men too be detected in
the background, all their heroic deeds and successes are really only
intended to win the admiration and favour of women. In other respects
these day-dreams show great diversity and their fate varies. All of them
are either given up after a short time and replaced by a new one, or
retained, spun out into long stories, and adapted to changing
circumstances in life. They march with the times, receiving as it were
“date-stamps” upon them which show the influence of new situations. They
form the raw material of poetic production; for the writer by
transforming, disguising, or curtailing them creates out of his
day-dreams the situations which he embodies in his stories, novels, and
dramas. The hero of a day-dream is, however, always the subject himself,
either directly imagined in the part or transparently identified with
someone else.

Perhaps day-dreams are so called on account of their similar relation to
reality, as an indication that their content is no more to be accepted
as real than is that of dreams. But it is possible that they share the
name of dreams because of some mental characteristic of the dream which
we do not yet know but after which we are seeking. On the other hand, it
is possible that we are altogether wrong in regarding this similarity of
name as significant. That is a question which can only be answered
later.




                             SIXTH LECTURE
         PRELIMINARY HYPOTHESES AND TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION


We thus realize our need of a new way of approach, a definite method, if
we are to make any advance in our researches into dreams. I will now
offer an obvious suggestion: let us accept as the basis of the whole of
our further enquiry the following hypothesis—that dreams are not a
somatic, but a mental, phenomenon. You know what this means; but what is
our justification in making this assumption? We have none, but on the
other hand there is nothing to prevent us. The position is this: if the
dream is a somatic phenomenon it does not concern us; it can only be of
interest to us on the hypothesis that it is a mental phenomenon. So we
will assume that this hypothesis is true, in order to see what happens
if we do so. The results of our work will determine whether we may
adhere to the assumption, and uphold it in its turn as an inference
fairly drawn. Now what exactly is the object of this enquiry of ours, or
to what are we directing our efforts? Our object is that of all
scientific endeavour—namely, to achieve an understanding of the
phenomena, to establish a connection between them, and, in the last
resort, wherever it is possible to increase our power over them.

So we continue our work on the assumption that dreams are a mental
phenomenon. In that event, they are a performance and an utterance on
the part of the dreamer, but of a kind that conveys nothing to us, and
which we do not understand. Now supposing that I give utterance to
something that you do not understand, what do you do? You ask me to
explain, do you not? Why may not we do the same—_ask the dreamer the
meaning of the dream_?

Remember, we have already found ourselves in a similar position. It
was when we were enquiring into certain errors, and the instance we
took was a slip of the tongue. Someone had said: “Then certain things
were _refilled_,” and thereupon we asked—no, fortunately it was not
_we_ who asked, but other people who had nothing to do with
psycho-analysis—_they_ asked what he meant by this enigmatic
expression. He answered at once that what he had intended to say was:
“That was a filthy business,” but had checked himself and substituted
the milder words: “Things were revealed there.” I explained to you
then that this enquiry was the model for every psycho-analytic
investigation, and you understand now that psycho-analytic technique
endeavours as far as possible to let the persons being analysed give
the answer to their own problems. The dreamer himself then should
interpret his dream for us.

That is not so simple with dreams, however, as we all know. Where errors
were concerned, this method proved possible in many cases; there were
others where the person questioned refused to say anything and even
indignantly repudiated the answer suggested to him. With dreams,
instances of the first type are entirely lacking; the dreamer always
says he knows nothing about it. He cannot very well repudiate our
interpretation, since we have none to offer him. Shall we have to give
up our attempt then? Since _he_ knows nothing, and _we_ know nothing,
and a third person can surely know nothing either, there cannot be any
prospect of finding the answer. Well, if you like, give up the attempt.
But if you are not so minded, you can accompany me. For I assure you
that it is not only quite possible, but highly probable, that the
dreamer really does know the meaning of his dream; _only he does not
know that he knows, and therefore thinks that he does not_.

At this point you will probably call my attention to the fact that I am
again introducing an assumption, the second in quite a short context,
and that by so doing I greatly detract from the force of my claim to a
trustworthy method of procedure. Given the hypothesis that dreams are a
mental phenomenon, and given further the hypothesis that there are in
the minds of men certain things which they know without knowing that
they know them—and so forth! You have only to keep in view the intrinsic
improbability of both these hypotheses, and you may with an easy mind
abandon all interest in the conclusions to be drawn from them.

Well, I have not brought you here either to delude you or to conceal
anything from you. True, I announced that I would give a course of
lectures entitled Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis; but it was
no part of my purpose to play the oracle, professing to show you an easy
sequence of facts, whilst carefully concealing all difficulties, filling
up gaps, and glossing over doubtful points, so that you might
comfortably enjoy the belief that you have learnt something new. No, it
is the very fact that you are beginners that makes me anxious to show
you our science as it is, with all its excrescences and crudities, the
claims that it makes and the criticism to which it may give rise. I know
indeed that it is the same in every science and that, especially in the
beginnings, it cannot be otherwise. I know too that, in teaching other
sciences, an effort is made at first to hide these difficulties and
imperfections from the learner. But that cannot be done in
psycho-analysis. So I really have set up two hypotheses, the one within
the other; and anyone who finds it all too laborious, or too uncertain,
or who is used to higher degrees of certainty, or to more refined
deductions, need go no further with me. Only I should advise him to
leave psychological problems altogether alone, for it is to be feared
that this is a field in which he will find no access to such exact and
sure paths as he is prepared to tread. And, further, it is quite
superfluous for any science which can offer a real contribution to
knowledge to strive to make itself heard and to win adherents. Its
reception must depend upon its results, and it can afford to wait until
these have compelled attention.

But I may warn those of you who are not to be deterred in this way that
my two assumptions are not of equal importance. The first, that dreams
are a mental phenomenon, is the hypothesis which we hope to prove by the
results of our work. The second has already been proved in a different
field, and I am merely taking the liberty of transferring it thence to
our problems.

Where, and in what connection, is it supposed to have been proved that a
man can possess knowledge without knowing that he does so, which is the
assumption we are making of the dreamer? Surely that would be a
remarkable and surprising fact, which would change our conception of
mental life and would have no need of concealment. Incidentally, it
would be a fact belied in the very statement of it, which yet attempts
to be literally true—a contradiction in terms. There is not, however,
any attempt at concealment. We cannot blame the fact for people’s
ignorance of it, or lack of interest in it, any more than we ourselves
are to blame because all these psychological problems have been passed
in judgement by persons who have held aloof from all the observations
and experiments which alone can be conclusive.

The proof to which I refer was found in the sphere of hypnotic
phenomena. In the year 1889 I was present at the remarkably impressive
demonstrations by Liébault and Bernheim, in Nancy, and there I witnessed
the following experiment. A man was placed in a condition of
somnambulism, and then made to go through all sorts of hallucinatory
experiences. On being wakened, he seemed at first to know nothing at all
of what had taken place during his hypnotic sleep. Bernheim then asked
him in so many words to tell him what had happened while he was under
hypnosis. The man declared that he could not remember anything.
Bernheim, however, insisted upon it, pressed him, and assured him that
he did know and that he must remember, and lo and behold! the man
wavered, began to reflect, and remembered in a shadowy fashion first one
of the occurrences which had been suggested to him, then something else,
his recollection growing increasingly clear and complete until finally
it was brought to light without a single gap. Now, since in the end he
had the knowledge without having learnt anything from any other quarter
in the meantime, we are justified in concluding that these recollections
were in his mind from the outset. They were merely inaccessible to him;
he did not know that he knew them but believed that he did not know. In
fact, his case was exactly similar to what we assume the dreamer’s to
be.

I hope you are duly surprised that this fact is already established and
that you will ask me: “Why did you not refer to this proof before, when
we were considering errors and came to the point of ascribing to a man
who had made a slip of the tongue intentions behind his speech, of which
he knew nothing, and which he denied? If it is possible for a man to
believe that he knows nothing of experiences of which nevertheless he
does possess the recollection, it seems no longer improbable that there
should be other mental processes going on within him about which also he
knows nothing. We should certainly have been impressed by this argument
and should have been in a better position to understand about errors.”
Certainly, I might have brought forward this proof then, but I reserved
it for a later occasion when there would be more need for it. Some of
the errors explained themselves, others suggested to us that in order to
understand the connection between the phenomena it would be advisable to
postulate the existence of mental processes of which the person is
entirely ignorant. With dreams we are compelled to seek our explanations
elsewhere, and besides, I am counting on your being more ready to accept
in this connection a proof from the field of hypnosis. The condition in
which we perform errors must seem to you normal and, as such, to bear no
similarity to that of hypnosis. On the other hand there exists a clear
relationship between the hypnotic state and sleep, the essential
condition of dreaming. Hypnosis is actually called artificial sleep; we
say to the people whom we hypnotize: “Sleep,” and the suggestions made
to them are comparable to the dreams of natural sleep. The mental
situation is really analogous in the two cases. In natural sleep we
withdraw our interest from the whole outer world; so also in hypnotic
sleep, with the exception of the one person who has hypnotized us and
with whom we remain in rapport. Again, the so-called “nurse’s sleep” in
which the nurse remains in rapport with the child and can be wakened
only by him is a normal counterpart of hypnotic sleep. So it does not
seem so very audacious to carry over to natural sleep something which is
a condition in hypnosis. The assumption that some knowledge about his
dream exists in the dreamer and that this knowledge is merely
inaccessible to him, so that he himself does not believe he has it, is
not a wild invention. Incidentally, we observe here that a third way of
approaching the study of dreams is thus opened out for us; we may
approach it by the avenue of sleep-disturbing stimuli, by that of
day-dreams, and now by that of the dreams suggested during hypnosis.

Now perhaps we shall return to our task with greater confidence. We see
it is very probable that the dreamer knows something about his dream;
the problem is how to make it possible for him to get at his knowledge
and impart it to us. We do not expect him immediately to tell us what
his dream means, but we do think he will be able to discover its source,
from what circle of thoughts and interests it is derived. With errors,
you will remember the man was asked how the slip of the tongue
“refilled” had come about, and his first association gave us the
explanation. The technique we employ in the case of dreams is very
simple and is modelled on this example. Here again we shall ask the
dreamer how he came to have the dream, and his next words must be
regarded as giving the explanation in this case also. It makes no
difference to us therefore, whether he thinks that he does or does not
know anything about it, and we treat both cases alike.

This technique is certainly very simple, nevertheless I am afraid it
will provoke most strenuous opposition in you. You will say: “Another
assumption, the third! And the most improbable of all! When I ask the
dreamer what ideas come to him about the dream, do you mean to say that
his very first association will give the desired explanation? But surely
he might have no association at all, or heaven only knows what the
association might be. We cannot imagine upon what grounds such an
expectation is based. It really implies too much trust in Providence,
and this at a point where rather more exercise of the critical faculty
would better meet the case. Besides, a dream is not like a single slip
of the tongue but is made up of many elements. That being so, upon which
association is one to rely?”

You are right in all the unessentials. It is true that a dream differs
from a slip of the tongue in the matter of its many elements as well as
in other points. We must take account of that in our technique. So I
suggest to you that we divide the dream up into its various elements,
and examine each element separately; then we shall have re-established
the analogy with a slip of the tongue. Again, you are right in saying
that the dreamer when questioned on the single elements of the dream may
reply that he has no ideas about them. There are cases in which we
accept this answer, and later I will tell you which these are; curiously
enough, they are cases about which we ourselves may have certain
definite ideas. But in general, when the dreamer declares that he has no
ideas, we shall contradict him, press him to answer, assure him that he
must have some idea and—shall find we are right. He will produce an
association, any one, it does not matter to us what it is. He will be
especially ready with information which we may term historical. He will
say: “That is something which happened yesterday” (as in the instance of
the two “prosaic” dreams quoted above) or: “That reminds me of something
which happened recently,” and in this way we shall come to notice that
dreams are much more often connected with impressions of the day before
than we thought at first. Finally, with the dream as his starting-point,
he will recall events which happened less recently, and at last even
some which lie very far back in the past.

In regard to the main issue, however, you are wrong. When you think it
arbitrary to assume that the first association of the dreamer must give
us just what we are looking for, or at any rate lead to it, and further,
that the association is much more likely to be quite capricious and to
have no connection with what we are looking for, and that it only shows
my blind trust in Providence if I expect anything else—then you make a
very great mistake. I have already taken the liberty of pointing out to
you that there is within you a deeply-rooted belief in psychic freedom
and choice, that this belief is quite unscientific, and that it must
give ground before the claims of a determinism which governs even mental
life. I ask you to have some respect for the _fact_ that that one
association, and nothing else, occurs to the dreamer when he is
questioned. Nor am I setting up one belief against another. It can be
proved that the association thus given is not a matter of choice, not
indeterminate, and that it is not unconnected with what we are looking
for. Indeed, I have recently learnt—not that I attach too much
importance to the fact—that experimental psychology itself has brought
forward similar proofs.

Because of the importance of the matter I ask you to pay special
attention to this. When I ask a man to say what comes to his mind about
any given element in a dream, I require him to give himself up to the
process of FREE ASSOCIATION _which follows when he keeps in mind the
original idea_. This necessitates a peculiar attitude of the attention,
something quite different from reflection, indeed, precluding it. Many
people adopt this attitude without any difficulty, but others when they
attempt to do so display an incredible inaptitude. There is a still
higher degree of freedom in association which appears when I dispense
with any particular stimulus-idea and perhaps only describe the kind and
species of association that I want; for example, ask someone to let a
proper name or a number occur to him. An association of this sort
should, one would say, be even more subject to choice and unaccountable
than the kind used in our technique. Nevertheless, it can be shown that
in every instance it will be strictly determined by important inner
attitudes of mind, which are unknown to us at the moment when they
operate, just as much unknown as are the disturbing tendencies which
cause errors, and those tendencies which bring about so-called “chance”
actions.

I myself and many after me have repeatedly made an examination of names
and numbers called up without any particular idea as a starting-point;
some of these experiments have been published. The method is this: a
train of associations is stirred up by the name which occurred, and
these associations, as you see, are no longer quite free, but are
attached just so far as the associations to the different elements of
the dream are attached; this train of associations is then kept up until
the thoughts arising from the impulse have been exhausted. By that time,
however, you will have explained the motivation and significance of the
free association with a name. The experiments yield the same result
again and again; the information they give us often includes a wealth of
material and necessitates going far afield into its ramifications. The
associations to numbers that arise spontaneously are perhaps the most
demonstrative; they follow upon one another so swiftly and make for a
hidden goal with such astounding certainty that one is really quite
taken aback. I will give you just one example of a name-analysis of this
sort, because it happens to be one which does not involve the handling
of a great mass of material.

Once, when I was treating a young man, I happened to say something on
this subject and to assert that in spite of our apparent freedom of
choice in such matters we cannot, in point of fact, think of any name
which cannot be shown to be narrowly determined by the immediate
circumstances, the idiosyncrasies, of the person experimented with and
his situation at the moment. As he was inclined to be sceptical, I
proposed that he should make the experiment himself then and there. I
knew that he had unusually numerous relationships of all sorts with
women and girls, so I told him that I thought he would have an
exceptionally large number to choose from if he were to let the name of
a woman occur to him. He agreed. To my surprise, or rather perhaps to
his own, he did not overwhelm me with an avalanche of women’s names, but
remained silent for a time, and then confessed that the only name which
came into his mind at all was “Albine.” “How curious! What do you
connect with this name? How many Albines do you know?” Strangely enough,
he knew no one of the name of Albine, and he found no associations to
the name. One might infer that the analysis had failed; but no, it was
already complete, and no further association was required. The man
himself was unusually fair in colouring, and whilst talking to him in
analysis I had often jokingly called him an _albino_; moreover, we were
just in the midst of tracing the _feminine_ element in his nature. So it
was he himself who was this female albino, the “woman” who interested
him most at the moment.

In the same way, the tunes which suddenly come into a man’s head can be
shown to be conditioned by some train of thought to which they belong,
and which for some reason is occupying his mind without his knowing
anything about it. It is easy to show that the connection with the tune
is to be sought either in the words which belong to it or in the source
from which it comes: I must, however, make this reservation, that I do
not maintain this in the case of really musical people of whom I happen
to have had no experience; in them the musical value of the tune may
account for its suddenly emerging into consciousness. The first case is
certainly much more common; I know of a young man who for some time was
absolutely haunted by the tune (a charming one, I admit) of the song of
Paris in _Helen of Troy_, until his attention was drawn in analysis to
the fact that at that time an “Ida” and a “Helen” were rivals in his
interest.

If then the associations which arise quite freely are determined in this
way and belong to some definite context, we are surely justified in
concluding that associations attached to one single stimulus-idea must
be equally narrowly conditioned. Examination shows as a fact that they
are not only attached in the first place to the stimulus-idea which we
have provided for them, but that they are also dependent, in the second
place, on circles of thoughts and interests of strong affective value
(_complexes_, as we call them) of whose influence at the time nothing is
known, that is to say, on unconscious activities.

Associations attached in this way have been made the subject of very
instructive experiments, which have played a notable part in the history
of psycho-analysis. Wundt’s school originated the so-called
‘association-experiment,’ in which the subject of the experiment is
bidden to reply to a given ‘stimulus-word’ as quickly as possible with
whatever ‘reaction-word’ occurs to him. The following points may then be
noted: the interval which elapses between the sounding of the
stimulus-word and of the reaction-word, the nature of the latter, and
possibly any mistake which comes in when the same experiment is repeated
later, and so on. The Zurich School, under the leadership of Bleuler and
Jung, arrived at the explanation of the reactions to the
association-experiment by asking the person experimented upon to throw
light upon any associations which seemed at all remarkable, by means of
subsequent associations. In this way it became clear that these unusual
reactions were most strictly determined by the complexes of the person
concerned. By this discovery Bleuler and Jung built the first bridge
between experimental psychology and psycho-analysis.

Having heard this you may possibly say: “We admit now that free
associations are subject to determination and not a matter of choice, as
we thought at first, and we admit this also in the case of associations
to the elements of dreams. But it is not this that we are bothering
about. You maintain that the association to each element in the dream is
determined by some mental background to this particular element, a
background of which we know nothing. We cannot see that there is any
proof of this. Naturally we expect that the association to the
dream-element will be shown to be conditioned by one of the complexes of
the dreamer, but what good is that to us? That does not help us to
understand the dream; it merely leads to some knowledge of these
so-called complexes, as did the association-experiment; but what have
these to do with the dream?”

You are right, but you are overlooking an important point, the very
thing which deterred me from choosing the association-experiment as a
starting-point for this discussion. In this experiment the
stimulus-word, the single thing which determines the reaction, is chosen
by us at will, and the reaction stands as intermediary between this
stimulus-word and the complex aroused in the person experimented upon.
In the dream, the stimulus-word is replaced by something derived from
the mental life of the dreamer, from sources unknown to him, and hence
may very probably be itself a ‘derivative of a complex.’ It is not,
therefore, altogether fantastic to suppose that the further associations
connected with the elements of the dream are determined by no other
complex than that which has produced the particular element itself, and
that they will lead to the discovery of that complex.

Let me give you another instance which may serve to show that, in the
case of dreams, the facts bear out our expectations. The forgetting of
proper names is really an excellent prototype of what happens in
dream-analysis, only that in the former case one person alone is
concerned, while in the interpretation of dreams there are two. When I
forget a name temporarily, I am still certain that I know it, and by way
of a détour through Bernheim’s experiment, we are now in a position to
achieve a similar certainty in the case of the dreamer. Now this name
which I have forgotten, and yet really know, eludes me. Experience soon
teaches me that no amount of thinking about it, even with effort, is any
use. I can, however, always think of another or of several other names
instead of the forgotten one. When such a substitute name occurs to me
spontaneously, only then is the similarity between this situation and
that of dream-analysis evident. The dream-element also is not what I am
really looking for; it is only a substitute for something else, for the
real thing which I do not know and am trying to discover by means of
dream-analysis. Again the difference is that when I forget a name I know
perfectly well that the substitute is not the right one, whereas we only
arrived at this conception of the dream-element by a laborious process
of investigation. Now there also is a way in which, when we forget a
name, we can by starting from the substitute, arrive at the real thing
eluding our consciousness at the moment, i.e. the forgotten name. If I
turn my attention to these substitute names and let further associations
to them come into my mind, I arrive after a short or a long way round at
the name I have forgotten, and in so doing I discover that the
substitutes I have spontaneously produced had a definite connection
with, and were determined by, the forgotten name.

I will give you an instance of an analysis of this sort: one day I found
that I could not call to mind the name of the small country on the
Riviera, of which Monte Carlo is the capital. It was most annoying, but
so it was. I delved into all my knowledge about the country; I thought
of Prince Albert of the House of Lusignan, of his marriages, of his
passion for deep-sea exploration—in fact of everything I could summon
up, but all to no purpose. So I gave up trying to think and, instead of
the name I had lost, let substitute names come into my mind. They came
quickly: Monte Carlo itself, then Piedmont, Albania, Montevideo, Colico.
Albania was the first to attract my attention; it was immediately
replaced by Montenegro, probably because of the contrast between black
and white. Then I noticed that four of the substitute names have the
same syllable “mon,” and immediately I recalled the forgotten word and
cried out “Monaco.” You see the substitutes really originated in the
forgotten name; the four first came from the first syllable and the last
gave the sequence of the syllables and the whole of the final syllable.
Incidentally, I could quite easily find out what had made me forget the
name for the time being. Monaco is the Italian name for Munich, and it
was some thoughts connected with this town which had acted as an
inhibition.

Now that is a very pretty example, but it is too simple. In other cases
you might have to take a longer succession of associations to the
substitute name, and then the analogy to dream-analysis would be
clearer. I have had experiences of that sort, too. A stranger once
invited me to drink some Italian wine with him, and in the inn he found
he had forgotten the name of the wine which he had meant to order on
account of his very pleasant recollections of it. A number of dissimilar
substitute names occurred to him, and from these I was able to infer
that the thought of someone called Hedwig had made him forget the name
of the wine. Sure enough, not only did he tell me that there had been a
Hedwig with him on the occasion when he first tasted the wine, but this
discovery brought back to him the name he wanted. He was now happily
married, and “Hedwig” belonged to earlier days which he did not care to
recall.

What is possible in the case of forgotten names must be also possible in
the interpretation of dreams: starting from the substitute, we must be
able to arrive at the real object of our search by means of a train of
associations; and further, arguing from what happens with forgotten
names, we may assume that the associations to the dream-element will
have been determined not only by that element but also by the real
thought which is not in consciousness. If we could do this, we should
have gone some way towards justifying our technique.




                            SEVENTH LECTURE
                  MANIFEST CONTENT AND LATENT THOUGHTS


You see that our study of errors has not been fruitless. Thanks to our
exertions in that direction, we have—reasoning from the hypotheses with
which you are familiar—secured two results: a conception of the nature
of the dream-element and a technique of dream-interpretation. The
conception of the dream-element is as follows: it is not in itself a
primary and essential thing, a ‘thought proper,’ but a substitute for
something else unknown to the person concerned, just as is the
underlying intention of the error, a substitute for something the
knowledge of which is indeed possessed by the dreamer but is
inaccessible to him. We hope to be able to carry over the same
conception on to the dream as a whole, which consists of a number of
such elements. Our method is to allow other substitute-ideas, from which
we are able to divine that which lies hidden, to emerge into
consciousness by means of free association to the said elements.

I am now going to propose that we introduce an alteration in our
nomenclature in order to make our terminology more flexible. Instead of
using the words “hidden,” “inaccessible,” or “proper,” let us give a
more precise description and say “inaccessible to the consciousness of
the dreamer” or “unconscious.” By that we mean nothing more than was
implied in the case of the forgotten word, or the underlying intention
responsible for the error; that is to say, _unconscious at the moment_.
It follows that in contradistinction we may call the dream-elements
themselves, and those substitute-ideas arrived at by the process of
association, _conscious_. No theoretical implication is so far contained
in these terms; no exception can be taken to the use of the word
“unconscious” as a description at once applicable and easy to
understand.[26]

Now, transferring our conception from the single element to the dream as
a whole, it follows that the latter is the distorted substitute for
something else, something unconscious, and that the task of
dream-interpretation is to discover these unconscious thoughts. Hence
are derived three important rules which should be observed in the work
of dream-interpretation:

1. We are not to trouble about the surface meaning of the dream, whether
it be reasonable or absurd, clear or confused; in no case does it
constitute the unconscious thoughts we are seeking. (An obvious
limitation of this rule will force itself upon us later.)

2. We are to confine our work to calling up substitute-ideas for every
element and not to ponder over them and try to see whether they contain
something which fits in, nor to trouble ourselves about how far they are
taking us from the dream-element.

3. We must wait until the hidden unconscious thoughts which we are
seeking appear of their own accord, just as in the case of the missing
word “Monaco” in the experiment which I described.

Now we understand also how entirely indifferent it is whether we
remember much or little of our dreams, above all whether we remember
them accurately or not. The dream as remembered is not the real thing at
all, but _a distorted substitute_ which, by calling up other
substitute-ideas, provides us with a means of approaching the thought
proper, of bringing into consciousness the unconscious thoughts
underlying the dream. If our recollection was at fault, all that has
happened is that a further distortion of the substitute has taken place,
and this distortion itself cannot be without motivation.

We can interpret our own dreams as well as those of others; indeed, we
learn more from our own and the process carries more conviction. Now if
we experiment in this direction, we notice that something is working
against us. Associations come, it is true, but we do not admit them all;
we are moved to criticize and to select. We say to ourselves of one
association: “No, that does not fit in—it is irrelevant,” and of
another: “That is too absurd,” and of a third: “That is quite beside the
point”; and then we can observe further that in making such objections
we stifle, and in the end actually banish, the associations before they
have become quite clear. So on the one hand we tend to hold too closely
to the initial idea, that is, the dream-element itself, and on the
other, by allowing ourselves to select, we vitiate the results of the
process of free association. If we are not attempting the interpretation
by ourselves, but are allowing someone else to interpret, we shall
clearly perceive another motive impelling us to this selection,
forbidden as we know it to be. We find ourselves thinking at times: “No,
this association is too unpleasant; I cannot, or will not, tell it to
him.”

Clearly these objections threaten to spoil the success of our work. We
must guard against them when we are interpreting our own dreams by
resolving firmly not to yield to them, and, in interpreting those of
someone else, by laying down the hard and fast rule that he must not
withhold any association, even if one of the four objections I have
named rises up against it, namely, that it is too unimportant, too
absurd, too irrelevant or too unpleasant to speak of. He promises to
keep this rule, and we may well feel annoyed when we find how badly he
fulfils his promise later on. At first we account for this by imagining
that in spite of our authoritative assurance he is not convinced that
the process of free association will be justified by its results; and
perhaps our next idea will be to win him over first to our theory, by
giving him books to read or sending him to lectures so that he may be
converted to our views on the subject. But we shall be saved from any
such false steps by observing that the same critical objections against
certain associations arise even in ourselves, whom we surely cannot
suspect of doubt, and can only subsequently, on second thoughts as it
were, be overcome.

Instead of being annoyed at the dreamer’s disobedience, we can turn this
experience to good account as a means of learning something new,
something which is the more important the more unprepared we were for
it. We realize that the work of dream-interpretation is encountering
opposition by a _resistance_ which expresses itself in this very form of
critical objections. This resistance is independent of the theoretical
conviction of the dreamer. We learn even more than this. Experience
shows that a critical objection of this nature is never justified. On
the contrary, the associations which people wish to suppress in this way
prove _without exception_ to be the most important, to be decisive for
the discovery of the unconscious thought. When an association is
accompanied by an objection of this sort it positively calls for special
notice.

This resistance is something entirely new; a phenomenon which we have
found by following out our hypotheses, although it was not included in
them. We are not altogether agreeably surprised by this new factor which
we have to reckon with, for we suspect already that it will not make our
work any easier: it might almost tempt us to give up the effort with
dreams altogether. To take such a trivial subject and then to have so
much trouble, instead of spinning along smoothly with our technique! But
we might on the other hand find these difficulties fascinating and be
led to suspect that the work will be worth the trouble. Resistances
invariably confront us when we try to penetrate to the hidden
unconscious thought from the substitute offered by the dream-element. We
may suppose, therefore, that something very significant must be
concealed behind the substitute; for, if not, why should we meet with
such difficulties, the purpose of which is to keep up the concealment?
When a child will not open his clenched fist to show what is in it, we
may be quite certain that it is something which he ought not to have.

As soon as we introduce into our subject the dynamic conception of
resistance, we must bear in mind that this factor is something
quantitatively variable. There are greater and lesser resistances, and
we are prepared to find these differences showing themselves in the
course of our work. Perhaps we can connect with this another experience
also met with in the process of dream-interpretation. I mean that
sometimes only a few associations—perhaps not more than one—suffice to
lead us from the dream-element to the unconscious thought behind it,
whilst on other occasions long chains of associations are necessary and
many critical objections have to be overcome. We shall probably think
that the number of associations necessary varies with the varying
strength of the resistances, and very likely we shall be right. If there
is only a slight resistance, the substitute is not far removed from the
unconscious thought; a strong resistance on the other hand causes great
distortions of the latter, and thereby entails a long journey back from
the substitute to the unconscious thought itself.

Perhaps this would be a good moment to select a dream and try our
technique upon it, to see whether the expectations we have entertained
are realized. Very well, but what dream shall we choose? You do not know
how difficult it is for me to decide, nor can I make it clear to you yet
what the difficulties are. Obviously there must be dreams in which on
the whole there is very little distortion, and one would think it would
be best to begin with these. But which are the least distorted dreams?
Those which make good sense and are not confused, of which I have
already given you two examples? In assuming this, we should make a great
mistake, for examination shows that these dreams have undergone an
exceptionally high degree of distortion. Supposing then that I make no
special condition but take any dream at random, you would probably be
very much disappointed. We might have to observe and record such a vast
number of associations to the single dream-elements that it would be
quite impossible to gain any clear view of the work as a whole. If we
write the dream down and compare with it all the associations which it
produces, we are likely to find that they have multiplied the length of
the text of the dream many times. So the most practical method would
seem to be that of selecting for analysis several short dreams, each of
which can at least convey some idea to us or confirm some supposition.
This will be the course we shall decide to take, unless experience gives
us a hint where we ought really to look for slightly distorted dreams.

But I can suggest another means of simplifying matters, one which lies
right before us. Instead of attempting the interpretation of whole
dreams, let us confine ourselves to single dream-elements and find out
by taking a series of examples how the application of our technique
explains them:—

(_a_) A lady related that as a child she very often dreamt that _God had
a pointed paper cap on his head_. How are you going to understand that
without the help of the dreamer? It sounds quite nonsensical; but the
absurdity disappears when the lady says that as a little girl she used
to have a cap like that put on her head at table, because she wouldn’t
give up looking at the plates of her brothers and sisters to see whether
any of them had been given more than she. Evidently the cap was meant to
serve the purpose of blinkers; this piece of historical information was
given, by the way, without any difficulty. The interpretation of this
element and, with it, of the whole short dream becomes easy enough with
the help of a further association of the dreamer’s: “As I had been told
that God knew everything and saw everything, the dream could only mean
that I knew and saw everything as God did, even when they tried to
prevent me.” This example is perhaps too simple.

(_b_) A sceptical patient had a longer dream, in which certain people
were telling her about my book on _Wit_ and praising it very highly.
Then something else came in about a _canal; it might have been another
book in which the word canal occurred, or something else to do with a
canal ... she did not know ... it was quite vague_.

Now you will certainly be inclined to suppose that the _canal_ in the
dream will defy interpretation on account of its vagueness. You are
right in expecting difficulty, but the difficulty is not caused by the
vagueness; on the contrary, the difficulty in interpretation is caused
by something else, by the same thing that makes the element vague. The
dreamer had no association to the word “canal”; naturally I did not know
what to say either. Shortly afterwards, to be accurate, on the next day,
she told me that an association had occurred to her which _perhaps_ had
something to do with it. It was in fact a witty remark which some one
had told her. On board ship between Dover and Calais a well-known author
was talking to an Englishman who in some particular context quoted the
words: “Du sublime au ridicule il n’y a qu’un pas.” The author answered:
“Oui, le Pas-de-Calais,” meaning that he regarded France as sublime and
England as ridiculous. Of course, the Pas-de-Calais is a _canal_—that is
to say, the Canal la Manche—the English Channel. Now, you ask, do I
think that this association had anything to do with the dream? Certainly
I think so: it gives the true meaning of the puzzling dream-element. Or
are you inclined to doubt that the joke already existed before the dream
and was the unconscious thought behind the element “canal,” and to
maintain that it was a subsequent invention? The association reveals the
scepticism disguised under the obtrusive admiration, and resistance was
no doubt the cause both of the association being so long in occurring to
her, and of the corresponding dream-element being so vague. Observe here
the relation between the dream-element and the unconscious thought
underlying it: it is, as it were, a fragment of the thought, an allusion
to it; by being isolated in that way it became quite incomprehensible.

(_c_) A patient had a fairly long dream, part of which was as follows:
_Several members of his family were seated at a table of a particular
shape_ ... etc. This table reminded the dreamer that he had seen one of
the same sort when he was visiting a certain family. From that his
thoughts ran on thus: in this family the relationship between father and
son was a peculiar one, and the patient presently added that his own
relationship to his father was, as a matter of fact, of the same nature.
So the table was introduced into the dream to indicate this parallelism.

It happened that this dreamer had long been familiar with the demands of
dream-interpretation; otherwise he might have taken exception to the
idea of investigating so trivial a detail as the shape of a table. We do
literally deny that anything in the dream is a matter of chance or of
indifference, and it is precisely by enquiring into such trivial and
(apparently) unmotivated details that we expect to arrive at our
conclusion. You may perhaps still be surprised that the dream-work
should happen to choose the table, in order to express the thought “Our
relationship is just like theirs.” But even this is explicable when you
learn that the family in question was named “_Tischler_.” (_Tisch_ =
table.) In making his relations sit at this table the dreamer’s meaning
was that they too were “Tischler.”[27] And notice another thing: that in
relating dream-interpretations of this sort one is forced into
indiscretion. There you have one of the difficulties I alluded to in the
matter of choosing examples. I could easily have given you another
example instead of this one, but probably I should have avoided this
indiscretion only to commit another in its place.

This seems to me a good point at which to introduce two new terms which
we might have used already. Let us call the dream as related _the
manifest dream-content_, and the hidden meaning, which we should come by
in following out the associations, _the latent dream-thoughts_. Then we
must consider the relation between the manifest content and the latent
thoughts, as shown in the above examples. There are many varieties of
these relations. In examples (_a_) and (_b_) the manifest dream-element
is also an integral part of the latent thoughts, but only a fragment of
them. A small piece of a great, composite, mental structure in the
unconscious dream-thoughts has made its way into the manifest dream
also, in the form of a fragment or in other cases as an allusion, like a
catch-word or an abbreviation in a telegraphic code. The interpretation
has to complete the whole to which this scrap or allusion belongs, which
it did most successfully in example (_b_). One method of the distorting
process in which the dream-work consists is therefore that of
substituting for something else a fragment or an allusion. In example
(_c_) we notice, moreover, another possible relation between manifest
content and latent thought, a relation which is even more plainly and
distinctly expressed in the following examples:—

(_d_) _The dreamer was pulling a certain lady of his acquaintance out of
a ditch._ He himself found the meaning of this dream-element by means of
the first association. It meant: he “picked her out,” preferred her.[28]

(_e_) Another man dreamt _that his brother was digging up his garden all
over again_. The first association was to deep-trenching for vegetables,
the second gave the meaning. The brother was _retrenching_. (Retrenching
his expenses).[29]

(_f_) _The dreamer was climbing a mountain from which he had a
remarkably wide view._ This sounds most reasonable; perhaps no
interpretation is called for and we have only to find out what
recollection is referred to in the dream, and what had aroused it. No,
you are mistaken; it comes out that this dream needed interpretation
just as much as any other, more confused. For the dreamer remembers
nothing about mountain-climbing himself; instead, it occurs to him that
an acquaintance is publishing a _Rundschau_ (Review), on the subject of
our relations with the most distant parts of the earth: hence, the
latent thought is one in which the dreamer identifies himself with the
“_reviewer_” (lit. one who takes a survey).

Here you come across a new type of relation between the manifest and the
latent element in dreams. The former is not so much a distortion of the
latter as a representation—a plastic, concrete piece of imagery,
originating in the sound of a word. It is true that this amounts in
effect to a distortion, for we have long forgotten from what concrete
image the word sprang, and hence fail to recognize it when that image is
substituted for it. When you consider that the manifest dream consists
of visual images in by far the greatest number of cases, and less
frequently of thoughts and words, you will easily realize that this kind
of relation between the manifest and the latent has a special
significance in the structure of dreams. You see too that in this way it
becomes possible for a long series of abstract thoughts to create
substitute-images in the manifest dream which do indeed serve the
purpose of concealment. This is how our picture-puzzles are made up. The
source of the semblance of wit which goes with this type of
representation is a special question which we need not touch on here.

There is a fourth kind of relation between the manifest and the latent
elements which I will say nothing about until the time comes for it in
my account of our technique. Even then I shall not have given you a full
list of these possible relations, but we shall have sufficient for our
purpose.

Now do you think you can summon up courage to venture on the
interpretation of a whole dream? Let us see whether we are adequately
equipped for the task. I shall not, of course, choose one of the most
obscure, but all the same it shall be one which shows the
characteristics of dreams in a well-marked form.

A young woman who had already been married for a number of years dreamt
as follows: _She was at the theatre with her husband, and one side of
the stalls was quite empty. Her husband told her that Elise L. and her
fiancé also wanted to come, but could only get bad seats, three for a
florin and a half, and of course they could not take those. She replied
that in her opinion they did not lose much by that._

The first thing stated by the dreamer is that the occasion giving rise
to the dream is alluded to in the manifest content: her husband had
really told her that Elise L., an acquaintance of about her own age, had
become engaged, and the dream is the reaction to this piece of news. We
know already that in many dreams it is easy to point to some such
occasion occurring on the day before, and that this is often traced by
the dreamer without any difficulty. This dreamer supplies us with
further information of the same sort about other elements in the
manifest dream. To what did she trace the detail of one side of the
stalls being empty? It was an allusion to a real occurrence of the week
before, when she had meant to go to a certain play and had therefore
booked seats _early_, so early that she had to pay extra for the
tickets. On entering the theatre it was evident that her anxiety had
been quite superfluous, for one side of the stalls was almost empty. It
would have been time enough if she had bought the tickets on the actual
day of the performance and her husband did not fail to tease her about
having been in _too great a hurry_. Next, what about the one florin and
a half (1 fl. 50)? This was traced to quite another context which had
nothing to do with the former, but it again refers to some news received
on the previous day. Her sister-in-law had had a present of 150 florins
from her husband and had rushed off _in a hurry_, like a silly goose, to
a jeweller’s shop and spent it all on a piece of jewellery. What about
the number three? She knew nothing about that unless this idea could be
counted an association, that the engaged girl, Elise L., was only three
months younger than she herself who had been married ten years. And the
absurdity of taking three tickets for two people? She had nothing to say
to this and refused to give any more associations or information
whatever.

Nevertheless, her few associations have provided us with so much
material that it is possible to discover the latent dream-thoughts. We
are struck by the fact that in her statements references to time are
noticeable at several points, which form a common basis for the
different parts of this material. She had got the theatre tickets _too
soon_, taken them in _too great a hurry_, so that she had to pay extra
for them; in the same way her sister-in-law had _hurried_ off to the
jeweller’s with her money to buy an ornament with it, as though she
might _miss something_. If the strongly emphasized points: “_too
early_,” “_too great a hurry_,” are connected with the occasion for the
dream (namely, the news that her friend, only three months _younger_
than herself, had now found a good husband after all) and with the
criticism expressed in her asperity about her sister-in-law, that it was
_folly_ to be so precipitate, there occurs to us almost spontaneously
the following construction of the latent dream-thoughts, for which the
manifest dream is a highly-distorted substitute:

“It was really _foolish_ of me to be in such a hurry to marry! Elise’s
example shows me that I too could have found a husband later on.” (The
over-haste is represented by her own conduct in buying the tickets and
that of her sister-in-law in buying the jewellery. Going to the theatre
is substituted for getting married.) This would be the main thought;
perhaps we may go on, though with less certainty because the analysis in
these passages ought not to be unsupported by statements of the dreamer:
“And I might have had one a hundred times better for the money!” (150
florins is 100 times more than one florin and a half.) If we may
substitute the dowry for the money, it would mean that the husband is
bought with the dowry: both the jewellery and the bad seats would stand
for the husband. It would be still more desirable if we could see some
connection between the element “three tickets” and a husband; but our
knowledge does not as yet extend to this. We have only found out that
the dream expresses _depreciation_ of her own husband and regret at
having _married so early_.

In my opinion we shall be more surprised and confused by the result of
this our first attempt at dream-interpretation than satisfied with it.
Too many ideas force themselves upon us at once, more than as yet we can
master. We see already that we shall not come to the end of what the
interpretation of this dream can teach us. Let us immediately single out
those points in which we can definitely see some new knowledge.

In the first place: we note that in the latent thoughts the chief
emphasis falls upon the element of hurry; in the manifest dream that is
exactly a feature about which we find nothing. Without analysis we could
have had no suspicion that this thought entered in at all. It seems
possible, therefore, that precisely the main point round which the
unconscious thoughts centre does not appear in the manifest dream at
all. This fact must radically change the impression made upon us by the
whole dream. In the second place: in the dream there is a nonsensical
combination of ideas (three for one florin and a half); in the
dream-thoughts we detect the opinion: “It was folly (to marry so
early).” Can one reject the conclusion that this thought, “It was
_folly_,” is represented by the introduction into the manifest dream of
an _absurd_ element? In the third place: comparison shows us that the
relation between manifest and latent elements is no simple one,
certainly not of such a kind that a manifest always replaces a latent
element. The relation between the two is of the nature of a relation
between two different groups, so that a manifest element can represent
several latent thoughts or a latent thought be replaced by several
manifest elements.

As regards the meaning of the dream and the dreamer’s attitude towards
it, here again we might find many surprising things to say. The lady
certainly admitted the interpretation, but she wondered at it; she had
not been aware that she had such disparaging thoughts of her husband;
she did not even know why she should so disparage him. So there is still
much that is incomprehensible about it. I really think that as yet we
are not properly equipped for interpreting a dream and that we need
further instruction and preparation first.




                             EIGHTH LECTURE
                           CHILDREN’S DREAMS


We had the impression that we had advanced too rapidly; let us therefore
retrace our steps a little. Before we made our last experiment in which
we tried to overcome the difficulty of dream-distortion by means of our
technique, we said that it would be best to circumvent it by confining
our attention to dreams in which distortion is absent or occurs only to
a very slight extent, if there are any such dreams. In doing this, we
are again departing from the actual course of development of our
knowledge; for in reality it was only after consistently applying our
method of interpretation, and after exhaustive analysis of dreams in
which distortion occurred, that we became aware of the existence of
those in which it is lacking.

The dreams we are looking for are met with in children: short, clear,
coherent, and easy to understand, they are free from ambiguity and yet
are unmistakable dreams. You must not think, however, that all dreams in
children are of this type. Distortion in dreams begins to appear very
early in childhood, and there are on record dreams of children between
five and eight years old which already show all the characteristics of
the dreams of later life. But, if you confine yourselves to those
occurring in the period between the dawn of recognizable mental activity
and the fourth or fifth year of life, you will discover a series which
we should characterize as infantile, and, in the later years of
childhood, you may find single dreams of the same type; indeed, even in
grown-up people under certain conditions dreams appear which in no way
differ from the typically infantile.

Now from these children’s dreams it is possible to obtain without any
difficulty trustworthy information about the essential nature of dreams,
which we hope will prove to be decisive and universally valid.

1. In order to understand these dreams there is no need for any analysis
nor for the employment of any technique. It is not necessary to question
the child who relates his dream. But we must know something about his
life; in every instance there is some experience from the previous day
which explains the dream. The dream is the mind’s reaction in sleep to
the experience of the previous day.

Let us consider some examples in order to base our further conclusions
upon them:

(_a_) A boy of a year and ten months old had to present someone with a
basket of cherries as a birthday gift. He plainly did it very
unwillingly, although he had been promised some of them for himself. The
next morning he told his dream: “Hermann eaten all the cherries.”

(_b_) A little girl of three and a quarter years went for the first time
for a trip on the lake. When they came to land, she did not wish to
leave the boat and cried bitterly; the time on the water had evidently
gone too quickly for her. Next morning she said: “Last night I was
sailing on the lake.” We may probably infer that this trip lasted
longer.

(_c_) A boy five and a quarter years old was taken on an excursion to
the Escherntal near Hallstatt. He had heard that Hallstatt lay at the
foot of the Dachstein and had shown great interest in that mountain.
From the lodgings in Aussee there was a fine view of the Dachstein, and
with a telescope it was possible to make out the Simony Hut on top. The
child had repeatedly endeavoured to see the hut through the telescope,
but nobody knew whether he had succeeded. The excursion began in a mood
of joyful expectation. Whenever a new mountain came into sight, the
little boy asked: “Is that the Dachstein?” Every time his question was
answered in the negative he grew more out of spirits and presently
became silent and refused to climb a little way up to the waterfall with
the others. He was thought to be overtired, but the next morning he said
quite happily: “Last night I dreamt that we were in the Simony Hut.” So
it was with this expectation that he had taken part in the excursion.
The only detail he gave was one he had heard before: “You have to climb
up steps for six hours.”

These three dreams will be enough to give us all the information we need
at this point.

2. We see that these childhood dreams are not meaningless; they are
complete, comprehensible mental acts. Remember the medical verdict about
dreams, which I told you, and the comparison with unskilled fingers
wandering over the keys of the piano. You cannot fail to notice how
sharply this conception is contradicted by the children’s dreams I have
quoted. Now it would surely be most extraordinary if a child were able
to achieve the performance of complete mental acts during sleep, and the
grown-up person in the same situation contented himself with spasmodic
reactions. Besides, we have every reason for attributing better and
deeper sleep to a child.

3. In these dreams there is no distortion and therefore they need no
interpretation: the manifest and the latent content is here identical.
From this we conclude that _distortion is not essential to the nature of
the dream_. I expect that this statement will take a weight off your
minds. Nevertheless, closer consideration forces us to admit that even
in these dreams distortion is present, though in a very slight degree,
that there is a certain difference between the manifest content and the
latent dream-thought.

4. The child’s dream is a reaction to an experience of the previous day,
which has left behind a regret, a longing, or an unsatisfied wish. _In
the dream we have the direct, undisguised fulfilment of this wish._ Now
consider our discussion as to the part played by the external or
internal somatic stimuli as disturbers of sleep and begetters of dreams.
We learnt certain quite definite facts on this point, but this
explanation only held good in a small number of dreams. In these
children’s dreams there is nothing to indicate the influence of such
somatic stimuli; we can make no mistake about it, for the dreams are
perfectly comprehensible and each can easily be grasped as a whole. But
we need not on that account give up our notion of the stimulus as
causing the dream. We can only ask why we forget from the outset that
there are _mental_ as well as bodily sleep-disturbing stimuli; surely we
know that it is these which are mainly responsible for disturbing the
sleep of the grown-up person, in that they hinder him from bringing
about in himself the mental condition essential for sleep, i.e. the
withdrawal of interest from the outside world. He wishes not to have any
interruption in his life; he would prefer to continue working at
whatever occupies him, and that is the reason why he does not sleep. The
mental stimulus which disturbs sleep is therefore for a child the
unsatisfied wish, and his reaction to this is a dream.

5. This takes us by a very short step to a conclusion about the function
of dreams. If dreams are the reaction to a mental stimulus their value
must lie in effecting a discharge of the excitation so that the stimulus
is removed and sleep can continue. We do not yet know how this discharge
through the dream is effected dynamically, but we notice already that
dreams are not disturbers of sleep (the accusation commonly brought
against them), but are guardians and deliverers of it from disturbing
influences. True, we are apt to think we should have slept better if we
had not dreamed, but there we are wrong: the truth is that without the
help of the dream we should not have slept at all, and we owe it to the
dream that we slept as well as we did. It could not help disturbing us a
little, just as a policeman often cannot avoid making a noise when
driving off disturbers of the peace who would wake us.

6. That dreams are brought about by a wish and that the content of the
dream expresses this wish is one main characteristic of dreams. The
other equally constant feature is that the dream does not merely give
expression to a thought, but represents this wish as fulfilled, in the
form of an hallucinatory experience. “I should like to sail on the
lake,” runs the wish which gives rise to the dream; the content of the
dream itself is: “I am sailing on the lake.” So that even in these
simple dreams belonging to childhood there is still a difference between
the latent and the manifest dream, and still a distortion of the latent
dream-thought, _in the translation of the thought into an experience_.
In interpreting a dream, we must first of all undo this process of
alteration. If this is to be regarded as one of the most universal
characteristics of all dreams, we then know how to translate the
dream-fragment I quoted before: “I see my brother digging” does not mean
“my brother _is_ retrenching,” but “I wish my brother would retrench, he
_is to_ retrench.” Of the two universal characteristics here mentioned
the second is obviously more likely to be acknowledged without
opposition than the first. It is only by extensive investigations that
we can make sure that what produces the dream must always be a _wish_
and cannot sometimes be a preoccupation, a purpose, or reproach; but the
other characteristic remains unaffected, namely, that the dream does not
merely reproduce this stimulus, but, by a kind of living it through,
removes it, sets it aside, relieves it.

7. In connection with these characteristics of dreams we may take up
again our comparison between dreams and errors. In the latter we
distinguished between a disturbing tendency and one which is disturbed,
the error being a compromise between the two. Dreams fall into the same
category; the disturbed tendency can only, of course, be the tendency to
sleep, while the disturbing tendency resolves itself into the mental
stimulus which we may call the wish (clamouring for gratification),
since at present we know of no other mental stimulus disturbing sleep.
Here again the dream is the result of a compromise; we sleep, and yet we
experience the satisfaction of a wish; we gratify a wish and at the same
time continue to sleep. Each achieves part-success and part-failure.

8. You will remember that at one point we hoped to find a path to an
understanding of the problems presented by dreams in the fact that
certain very transparent phantasy-formations are called “day-dreams.”
Now these day-dreams are literally wish-fulfilments, fulfilments of
ambitious or erotic wishes, which we recognize as such; they are,
however, carried out in thought, and, however vividly imagined, they
never take the form of hallucinatory experiences. Here, therefore, the
less certain of the two main characteristics of the dream is retained,
whereas the other, to which the condition of sleep is essential and
which cannot be realized in waking life, is entirely lacking. So in
language we find a hint that a wish-fulfilment is a main characteristic
of dreams. And further, if the experience we have in dreams is only
another form of imaginative representation, a form which becomes
possible under the peculiar conditions of the sleeping state—“a
nocturnal day-dream,” as we might call it—we understand at once how it
is that the process of dream-formation can abrogate the stimulus
operating at night and can bring gratification; for day-dreaming also is
a mode of activity closely linked up with gratification, which is in
fact the only reason why people practise it.

Again, there are other linguistic expressions, besides this, which imply
the same thing. We are familiar with the proverbs: “The pig dreams of
acorns and the goose of maize.” “What do chickens dream of? Of millet.”
The proverb, you see, goes even lower in the scale than we do, beyond
the child to the animal, and asserts that the content of dreams is the
satisfaction of a want. And there are many phrases which seem to point
to the same thing: we say “as beautiful as a dream.” “I should never
have dreamt of such a thing.” “I never imagined that in my wildest
dreams.” Here colloquial speech is clearly partial in its judgement. Of
course there are also anxiety-dreams, and dreams the content of which is
painful or indifferent, but these have not given rise to any special
phrases. We do indeed speak of “bad” dreams, but by a “dream” pure and
simple common usage always understands some sort of exquisite
wish-fulfilment. Nor is there any proverb which attempts to assert that
pigs or geese dream of being slaughtered!

It is, of course, inconceivable that this wish-fulfilling character of
dreams should have escaped the notice of writers on the subject. On the
contrary, they have very often remarked upon it; but it has not occurred
to any of them to recognize this characteristic as universal, and to
take it as the key to the explanation of dreams. We can easily imagine
what may have deterred them, and later we will discuss the question.

Now see how much information we have gained, and that with hardly any
trouble, from our study of children’s dreams! We have learnt that the
function of dreams is to protect sleep; that they arise out of two
conflicting tendencies, of which the one, the desire for sleep, remains
constant, whilst the other endeavours to satisfy some mental stimulus;
that dreams are proved to be mental acts, rich in meaning; that they
have two main characteristics, i.e., they are wish-fulfilments and
hallucinatory experiences. And meanwhile we could almost have forgotten
that we were studying psycho-analysis. Apart from the connection we have
made between dreams and errors our work has not borne any specific
stamp. Any psychologist knowing nothing of the assumptions of
psycho-analysis could have given this explanation of children’s dreams.
Why has no one done so?

If only all dreams were of the infantile type the problem would be
solved and our task already achieved, and that without questioning the
dreamer, referring to the unconscious or having recourse to the process
of free association. Clearly it is in this direction that we must
continue our work. We have already repeatedly found that characteristics
alleged to be universally valid have afterwards proved to hold good only
for a certain kind and a limited number of dreams. So the question we
now have to decide is whether the common characteristics revealed by
children’s dreams are any more stable than these, and whether they hold
also for those dreams whose meaning is not obvious and in whose manifest
content we can recognize no reference to a wish remaining from the day
before. Our idea is that these other dreams have undergone a good deal
of distortion and on that account we must refrain from immediate
judgement. We suspect too that to unravel this distortion we shall need
the help of psycho-analytic technique, which we could dispense with
while learning, as we have just now done, the meaning of children’s
dreams.

There is yet one other class of dreams at least in which no distortion
is present and which, like children’s dreams, we easily recognize to be
wish-fulfilments. These are dreams which are occasioned all through life
by imperative physical needs—hunger, thirst, sexual desire—and are
wish-fulfilments in the sense of being reactions to internal somatic
stimuli. Thus I have on record the dream of a little girl, one year and
seven months old, which consisted of a kind of menu, together with her
name (Anna F ..., strawberries, bilberries, egg, pap), the dream being a
reaction to a day of fasting, enforced on account of indigestion due to
eating the fruit which appeared twice in the dream. At the same time her
grandmother—their combined ages totalled seventy—was obliged, owing to a
floating kidney, to go without food for a day and dreamt that night that
she had been invited out and had had the most tempting delicacies set
before her. Observations on prisoners who are left to go hungry, and on
people who suffer privations whilst travelling or on expeditions, show
that in these circumstances they regularly dream about the satisfaction
of their wants. Thus Otto Nordenskjöld in his book on the Antarctic
(1904) tells us of the band of men in whose company he spent the winter
(Vol. I, p. 336): “Our dreams showed very clearly the direction our
thoughts were taking. Never had we dreamt so frequently and so vividly
as at that time. Even those of our comrades who usually dreamt but
rarely had now long stories to tell in the mornings when we exchanged
our latest experiences in this realm of phantasy. All the dreams were
about that outside world now so far away, but often they included a
reference to our condition at the time ... eating and drinking were,
incidentally, the pivot on which our dreams most often turned. One of
us, who was particularly good at going out to large dinners in his
sleep, was delighted when he could tell us in the morning that he had
had a three-course dinner. Another dreamt of tobacco, whole mountains of
tobacco; another of a ship which came full sail over the water, at last
clear of ice. Yet another dream deserves mention: the postman came with
the letters and gave a long explanation of why they were so late; he
said he had made a mistake in delivering them, and had had great trouble
in getting them back again. Of course, things even more impossible
occupied our minds in sleep, but the lack of imagination in almost all
the dreams which I dreamt myself or heard the others tell was quite
striking. It would certainly be of great psychological interest if we
had a record of all these dreams. You can imagine how we longed for
sleep, when it offered each one of us all that he most eagerly desired.”
Another quotation, this time from Du Prel: “Mungo Park, when nearly
dying of thirst on a journey in Africa, dreamt continually of the
well-watered hills and valleys of his home. So Trenck, tormented with
hunger in the redoubt at Magdebourg, saw himself in his dreams
surrounded by sumptuous meals; and George Back, who took part in
Franklin’s first expedition, when on the point of dying of hunger owing
to their terrible privations, dreamt regularly of abundant food to eat.”

Anyone who has made himself thirsty at night by eating highly-seasoned
dishes at supper is likely to dream of drinking. Of course it is not
possible to relieve acute hunger or thirst by dreaming; in that case we
awake thirsty and are obliged to drink real water. The service of the
dream is here of little practical account, but it is none the less clear
that it was called up for the purpose of protecting sleep from the
stimulus impelling us to wake up and act. Where the intensity of the
desire is less, ‘satisfaction’-dreams do often answer the purpose.

In the same way, when the stimulus is that of sexual desire the dream
provides satisfaction, but of a kind which shows peculiarities worthy of
mention. Since it is a characteristic of the sexual impulse that it is a
degree less dependent on its object than are hunger and thirst, the
satisfaction in a pollution-dream can be real; and, in consequence of
certain difficulties in the relation to the object (which will be
discussed later), it particularly often happens that the real
satisfaction is yet connected with a vague or distorted dream-content.
This peculiarity of pollution-dreams makes them, as O. Rank has
observed, suitable objects for the study of dream-distortion. Moreover,
with adults, dreams of desire usually contain besides the satisfaction
something else, springing from a purely mental source and requiring
interpretation if it is to be understood.

We do not maintain, by the way, that wish-fulfilment dreams of the
infantile type occur in adults solely as reactions to the imperative
desires I have mentioned. We are equally familiar with short clear
dreams of this type, occasioned by certain dominating situations and
unquestionably produced by mental stimuli. For example, there are
‘impatience’-dreams in which someone making preparations for a journey,
for a theatrical performance in which he is specially interested, or for
a lecture or a visit, has his expectations prematurely realized in a
dream, and finds himself the night before the actual experience already
at his journey’s end, at the theatre, or talking to the friend he is
going to visit. Or again, there is the ‘comfort’-dream, rightly
so-called, in which someone who wants to go on sleeping dreams that he
has already got up, that he is washing, or is at school, while all the
time he is really continuing his sleep, meaning that he would rather
dream of getting up than do so in reality. In these dreams the desire
for sleep, which we have recognized as regularly participating in
dream-formation, expresses itself plainly and appears as their actual
originator. The need for sleep ranks itself quite rightly with the other
great physical needs.

I would refer you at this point to the reproduction of a picture by
Schwind in the Schack Gallery at Munich[30] and would ask you to notice
how correctly the artist has realized the way in which a dream arises
out of a dominating situation. The picture is called _The Prisoner’s
Dream_, and the subject of the dream must undoubtedly be his escape. It
is a happy thought that the prisoner is to escape by the window, for it
is through the window that the ray of light has entered and roused him
from sleep. The gnomes standing one above the other no doubt represent
the successive positions he would have to assume in climbing up to the
window; and, if I am not mistaken and do not attribute too much
intentional design to the artist, the features of the gnome at the top,
who is filing the grating through (the very thing the prisoner himself
would like to do), resemble the man’s own.

I have said that in all dreams, other than those of children and such as
conform to the infantile type, we encounter the obstacle of distortion.
We cannot immediately say whether they too are wish-fulfilments, as we
are inclined to suppose, nor can we guess from their manifest content in
what mental stimulus they originate, or prove that they, like the
others, endeavour to remove or relieve the stimulus. They must, in fact,
be interpreted, i.e. translated; the process of distortion must be
reversed, and the manifest content replaced by the latent thought,
before we can make any definite pronouncement whether what we have found
out about infantile dreams may claim to hold good for all dreams alike.




                             NINTH LECTURE
                          THE DREAM-CENSORSHIP


Our study of children’s dreams has taught us how dreams originate, what
their essential character is, and what their function. Dreams are the
means of removing, by hallucinatory satisfaction, mental stimuli that
disturb sleep. It is true that with the dreams of adults we have been
able to explain one group only, those which we termed dreams of the
infantile type. We do not yet know how it may be with the others,
neither do we understand them. The result we have arrived at already is
one, however, of which the significance is not to be under-estimated.
Every time that we fully understand a dream it proves to be a
wish-fulfilment; and this coincidence cannot be accidental or
unimportant.

Dreams of another type are assumed by us to be distorted substitutes for
an unknown content, which first of all has to be traced; we have various
grounds for this assumption, amongst others the analogy to our
conception of errors. Our next task is to investigate and understand
this _dream-distortion_.

It is dream-distortion which makes dreams seem strange and
incomprehensible. There are several things we want to know about it:
first, whence it comes (its dynamics), secondly, what it does, and
finally, how it does it. Further, we can say that distortion is the
production of the _dream-work_. Let us describe the dream-work and trace
out the forces in it.

Now let me tell you a dream recorded by a lady well-known in
psycho-analytical circles[31], who said that the dreamer was an elderly
woman, highly cultivated and held in great esteem. The dream was not
analysed and our informant observed that for psycho-analysts it needed
no interpreting. Nor did the dreamer herself interpret it, but she
criticized it and condemned it in such a way as though she knew what it
meant. “Imagine,” she said, “such abominable nonsense being dreamt by a
woman of fifty, whose only thought day and night is concern for her
child.”

I will now tell you the dream, which is about “love service in
war-time.”[32] ‘She went to the First Military Hospital and said to the
sentinel at the gate that she must speak to the physician-in-chief
(giving a name which she did not know), as she wished to offer herself
for service in the hospital. In saying this, she emphasized the word
service in such a way that the sergeant at once perceived that she was
speaking of “love service.” As she was an old lady, he let her pass
after some hesitation, but instead of finding the chief physician, she
came to a large gloomy room, where a number of officers and army doctors
were standing or sitting around a long table. She turned to a staff
doctor and told him her proposal; he soon understood her meaning. The
words she said in her dream were: “I and countless other women and girls
of Vienna are ready for the soldiers, officers or men, to....” This
ended in a murmur. She saw, however, by the half-embarrassed,
half-malicious expressions of the officers that all of them grasped her
meaning. The lady continued: “I know our decision sounds odd, but we are
in bitter earnest. The soldier on the battlefield is not asked whether
he wishes to die or not.” There followed a minute of painful silence;
then the staff doctor put his arm round her waist and said: “Madam,
supposing it really came to this, that ... (murmur.)” She withdrew
herself from his arm, thinking: “They are all alike,” and replied: “Good
heavens, I am an old woman and perhaps it won’t happen to me. And one
condition must be observed: age must be taken into account, so that an
old woman and a young lad may not ... (murmur); that would be horrible.”
The staff doctor said: “I quite understand”; but some of the officers,
amongst them one who as a young man had made love to her, laughed
loudly, and the lady asked to be taken to the physician-in-chief, whom
she knew, so that everything might be put straight. It then struck her,
to her great consternation, that she did not know his name. The staff
doctor, however, with the utmost respect and courtesy, showed her the
way to the second floor, up a very narrow iron spiral staircase leading
direct from the room where they were to the upper storeys. As she went
up, she heard an officer say: “That is a tremendous decision, no matter
whether she is young or old; all honour to her!” With the feeling that
she was simply doing her duty, she went up an endless staircase.’

This dream was repeated twice within a few weeks, with alterations here
and there which, as the lady remarked, were quite unimportant and
entirely meaningless.

The way in which this dream progresses corresponds to the course of a
day-dream; there are only a few places where an interruption occurs, and
many individual points in its content might have been cleared up by
enquiry: this, however, as you know, was not undertaken. But the most
striking and to us the most interesting thing about it is the occurrence
of many gaps, not in the recollection, but in the content. In three
places the latter is, as it were, blotted out; where these gaps occur
the speeches are interrupted by a _murmur_. As we did not analyse the
dream, we have, strictly speaking, no right to say anything about its
meaning; but there are certain indications from which we may draw
conclusions, e.g. the words “love service”; and, above all, the broken
speeches immediately preceding the murmurs require completion of a kind
which admits of only one construction. If we do so complete them a
phantasy results, in which the content is that the dreamer is ready at
the call of duty to offer herself to gratify the sexual needs of the
troops, irrespective of rank. This is certainly shocking, a model of a
shamelessly libidinous phantasy, but—the dream says nothing about this.
Just where the context demands this confession, there is in the manifest
dream an indistinct murmur: something has been lost or suppressed.

I hope you recognize how obvious is the inference that it is just the
shocking nature of these passages which has led to their suppression.
Now where will you find a parallel to what has taken place here? In
these times you have not far to seek. Take up any political paper and
you will find that here and there in the text something is omitted and
in its place the blank white of the paper meets your eye: you know that
this is the work of the press censor. Where these blank spaces occur,
there originally stood something of which the authorities at the
censorship disapproved and which has been deleted on that account. You
probably think it a pity, for that must have been the most interesting
part, the “cream” of the news.

On other occasions the censorship has not dealt with the sentence in its
completed form; for the writer, foreseeing which passages were likely to
be objected to by the censor, has forestalled him by softening them
down, making some slight modification or contenting himself with hints
and allusions to what he really wants to write. In this case there are
no blanks, but from the roundabout and obscure mode of expression you
can detect the fact that, at the time of writing, the author had the
censorship in mind.

Now keeping to this parallel we say that those speeches in the dream
which were omitted or disguised by a murmur have also been sacrificed to
some form of censorship. We actually use the term DREAM-CENSORSHIP, and
ascribe part of the distortion to its agency. Wherever there are gaps in
the manifest dream we know that the censorship is responsible; and
indeed we should go further and recognize that wherever, amongst other
more clearly-defined elements, one appears which is fainter, more
indefinite or more dubious in recollection, it is evidence of the work
of the censorship. It is, however, seldom that it takes a form so
undisguised, so naïve, as we might say, as it does in the case of the
dream about “love service;” far more often the censorship makes itself
felt in the second way I mentioned: by effecting modifications, hints,
and allusions in place of the true meaning.

There is a third way in which the dream-censorship works, to which the
ordinances of the Press censorship supply no parallel; but it happens
that I can demonstrate to you this particular mode of activity on the
part of the dream-censorship in the only dream hitherto analysed by us.
You will remember the dream of the “three bad theatre tickets, costing
one florin and a half.” In the latent thoughts underlying this dream,
the element “too great a hurry, too early” was in the foreground; the
meaning was: “It was folly to marry so _early_, it was foolish also to
take the tickets so _early_, it was ridiculous of the sister-in-law to
spend her money so _hurriedly_ on a piece of jewellery.” Nothing of this
central element of the dream-thoughts appeared in the manifest content,
where everything was focussed on going to the theatre and taking
tickets. By this displacement of the accent and regrouping of the
dream-elements, the manifest content was made so unlike the latent
thoughts that nobody would suspect the presence of the latter behind the
former. This _displacement of accent_ is one of the principal means
employed in distortion, and it is this which gives the dream that
character of strangeness which makes the dreamer himself reluctant to
recognize it as the product of his own mind.

Omission, modification, regrouping of material—these then are the modes
of the dream-censorship’s activity and the means employed in distortion.
The censorship itself is the originator, or one of the originators, of
distortion, the subject of our present enquiry. Modification and
alteration in arrangement are commonly included under the term
‘_displacement_.’

After these remarks on the activities of the dream-censorship, let us
turn our attention to its dynamics. I hope you are not taking the
expression “censorship” in too anthropomorphic a sense, picturing to
yourselves the censor as a stern little manikin or a spirit, who lives
in a little chamber of the brain and there discharges the duties of his
office; and neither must you localize it too exactly, so that you
imagine a “brain-centre” whence there emanates a censorial influence,
liable to cease with the injury or disappearance of that centre. For the
present we may regard it merely as a useful term by which to express a
dynamic relationship. This need not hinder us from asking what sort of
tendencies exercise this influence and is it exercised upon; and
further, we must not be surprised to discover that we have already come
across the censorship, perhaps without recognizing it.

Indeed this has actually happened. Remember a surprising experience we
had when we began to apply our method of free association: we discovered
that our efforts to penetrate from the dream-element to the unconscious
thought proper for which the former is a substitute encountered a
certain _resistance_. The strength of this resistance, we said, varies,
being sometimes enormous and at other times very slight. In the latter
case we need only a few connecting-links for the work of interpretation;
but where there is great resistance we are compelled to go through long
chains of associations, which carry us far from the initial idea, and on
the way we have to overcome all the difficulties of professedly critical
objections to associations arising. That which we encountered as
resistance in the work of interpretation we now meet again as the
censorship in the dream-work: the resistance is simply the censorship
objectified; it proves to us that the power of the censorship is not
exhausted in effecting distortion, being thereby extinguished, but that
the censorship remains as a permanent institution, the object of which
is to maintain the distortion when once it has been achieved. Moreover,
just as the strength of the resistance encountered during interpretation
varies with each element, so too the degree of distortion effected by
the censorship is different for each element of a whole dream. A
comparison of the manifest and the latent dream shows that certain
latent elements are completely eliminated, others more or less modified,
and others again appear in the manifest dream-content unaltered or
perhaps even intensified.

Our purpose, however, was to find out which are the tendencies
exercising the censorship and upon which tendencies it is exercised. Now
this question, which is fundamental for the understanding of dreams and
perhaps of human life altogether, is easy to answer when we survey the
series of dreams which we have succeeded in interpreting. The tendencies
which exercise the censorship are those which are acknowledged by the
waking judgement of the dreamer and with which he feels himself to be at
one. You may be sure that when you repudiate any correctly-found
interpretation of a dream of your own, you do so from the same motives
as cause the censorship to be exercised and distortion effected, and
make interpretation necessary. Consider the dream of our lady of fifty:
her dream, although it had not been interpreted, struck her as shocking
and she would have been even more outraged if Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth had
told her something of its unmistakable meaning; it was just this
attitude of condemnation which caused the offensive passages in the
dream to be replaced by a murmur.

Those tendencies against which the dream-censorship is directed must
next be described from the point of view of this inner critical
standard. When we do this, we can only say that they are invariably of
an objectionable nature, offensive from the ethical, æsthetic or social
point of view, things about which we do not dare to think at all, or
think of only with abhorrence. Above all are these censored wishes,
which in dreams are expressed in a distorted fashion, manifestations of
a boundless and ruthless egoism; for the dreamer’s own ego makes its
appearance in every dream, and plays the principal part, even if it
knows how to disguise itself completely as far as the manifest content
is concerned. This _sacro egoismo_ of dreams is certainly not
unconnected with the attitude of mind essential to sleep: the withdrawal
of interest from the whole outside world.

The ego which has discarded all ethical bonds feels itself at one with
all the demands of the sexual impulse, those which have long been
condemned by our æsthetic training and those which are contrary to all
the restraints imposed by morality. The striving for pleasure—the
libido, as we say,—chooses its objects unchecked by any inhibition,
preferring indeed those which are forbidden: not merely the wife of
another man, but, above all, the incestuous objects of choice which by
common consent humanity holds sacred—the mother and the sister of men,
the father and the brother of women. (Even the dream of our
fifty-year-old lady is an incestuous one, the libido being unmistakably
directed towards the son.) Desires which we believe alien to human
nature show themselves powerful enough to give rise to dreams. Hate,
too, rages unrestrainedly; wishes for revenge, and death-wishes, against
those who in life are nearest and dearest—parents, brothers and sisters,
husband or wife, the dreamer’s own children—are by no means uncommon.
These censored wishes seem to rise up from a veritable hell; when we
know their meaning, it seems to us in our waking moments as if no
censorship of them could be severe enough. Dreams themselves, however,
are not to blame for this evil content; you surely have not forgotten
that their harmless, nay, useful, function is to protect sleep from
disturbance. Depravity does not lie in the nature of dreams; in fact,
you know that there are dreams which can be recognized as gratifying
justifiable desires and urgent bodily needs. It is true that there is no
distortion in these dreams, but then there is no need for it, they can
perform their function without offending the ethical and æsthetic
tendencies of the ego. Remember, too, that the degree of distortion is
proportionate to two factors: on the one hand, the more shocking the
wish that must be censored, the greater will be the distortion; but it
is also great in proportion as the demands of the censorship are severe.
Hence in a strictly brought up and prudish young girl, a rigid
censorship will distort dream-excitations which we medical men would
have recognized as permissible and harmless libidinous desires, and
which the dreamer herself would judge in the same way ten years later.

Besides, we are still not nearly far enough advanced to allow ourselves
to be outraged at the result of our work of interpretation. I think we
still do not understand it properly; but first of all it is incumbent
upon us to secure it against certain possible attacks. It is not at all
difficult to detect weak points in it. Our interpretations were based on
hypotheses which we adopted earlier: that there really is some meaning
in dreams; that the idea of mental processes being unconscious for a
time, which was first arrived at through hypnotic sleep, may be applied
also to normal sleep; and that all associations are subject to
determination. Now if, reasoning from these hypotheses, we had obtained
plausible results in our dream-interpretation we should have been
justified in concluding that these hypotheses were correct. But what if
these discoveries are of the kind I have described? In that case, surely
it seems natural to say: “These results are impossible, absurd, at the
very least highly improbable, so there must have been something wrong
about the hypotheses. Either the dream is after all not a mental
phenomenon, or there is nothing which is unconscious in our normal
condition, or there is a flaw somewhere in our technique. Is it not
simpler and more satisfactory to assume this than to accept all the
abominable conclusions which we profess to have deduced from our
hypotheses?”

Both! it is both simpler and more satisfactory, but not on that account
necessarily more correct. Let us give ourselves time: the matter is not
yet ripe for judgement. First of all, we can make the case against our
interpretations even stronger. The fact that our results are so
unpleasant and repellent would not perhaps weigh so very heavily with
us; a stronger argument is the emphatic and well-grounded repudiation by
dreamers of the wish-tendencies which we try to foist upon them after
interpretating their dreams. “What?” says one, “You want to prove to me
from my dream that I grudge the money I have spent on my sister’s dowry
and my brother’s education? But it is out of the question; I spend my
whole time working for my brothers and sisters and my only interest in
life is to do my duty by them, as, being the eldest, I promised our dead
mother I would.” Or a woman says: “I am supposed to wish that my husband
were dead? Really that is outrageous nonsense! Not only is our married
life very happy, though perhaps you won’t believe that, but if he died I
should lose everything I possess in the world.” Or someone else will
reply: “Do you mean to suggest that I entertain sexual desires towards
my sister? The thing is ludicrous; she is nothing to me; we get on badly
with one another, and for years I have not exchanged a word with her.”
We still might not be much impressed if these dreamers neither admitted
nor denied the tendencies attributed to them; we might say that these
are just the things of which they are quite unconscious. But when they
detect in their own minds the exact opposite of such a wish as is
interpreted to them, and when they can prove to us by their whole
conduct in life that the contrary desire predominates, surely we must be
nonplussed. Is it not about time now for us to discard our whole work of
dream-interpretation as something which has led to a _reductio ad
absurdum_?

No, not even now. Even this stronger argument falls to pieces when
subjected to a critical attack. Assuming that unconscious tendencies do
exist in mental life, the fact that the opposite tendencies predominate
in conscious life goes to prove nothing. Perhaps there is room in the
mind for opposite tendencies, for contradictions, existing side by side;
indeed, possibly the very predominance of the one tendency conditions
the unconscious nature of the opposite. So the first objections raised
only amount to the statement that the results of dream-interpretation
are not simple and are very disagreeable. To the first charge we may
reply that, however much enamoured of simplicity you may be, you cannot
thereby solve one of the problems of dreams; you have to make up your
mind at the outset to accept the fact of complicated relations. And, as
regards the second point, you are manifestly wrong in taking the fact
that something pleases or repels yourself as the motive for a scientific
judgement. What does it matter if you do find the results of
dream-interpretation unpleasant, or even mortifying and repulsive? _Ça
n’empêche pas d’exister_—as I, when a young doctor, heard my chief,
Charcot, say in a similar case. We must be humble and put sympathies and
antipathies honourably in the background if we would learn to know
reality in this world. If a physicist could prove to you that organic
life on the earth was bound to become extinct before long, would you
venture to say to him also: “That cannot be so; I dislike the prospect
too much.” I think you would say nothing, until another physicist came
along and convicted the first of a mistake in his premises or his
calculations. If you repudiate whatever is distasteful to you, you are
repeating the mechanism of a dream structure rather than understanding
and mastering it.

Perhaps, then, you will undertake to overlook the offensive nature of
the censored dream-wishes and will fall back upon the argument that it
is surely very improbable that we ought to concede so large a part in
the human constitution to what is evil. But do your own experiences
justify you in this statement? I will say nothing of how you may appear
in your own eyes, but have you met with so much goodwill in your
superiors and rivals, so much chivalry in your enemies and so little
envy amongst your acquaintances, that you feel it incumbent on you to
protest against the idea of the part played by egoistic baseness in
human nature? Do you not know how uncontrolled and unreliable the
average human being is in all that concerns sexual life? Or are you
ignorant of the fact that all the excesses and aberrations of which we
dream at night are crimes actually committed every day by men who are
wide awake? What does psycho-analysis do in this connection but confirm
the old saying of Plato that the good are those who content themselves
with dreaming of what others, the wicked, actually do?

And now look away from individuals to the great war still devastating
Europe: think of the colossal brutality, cruelty and mendacity which is
now allowed to spread itself over the civilized world. Do you really
believe that a handful of unprincipled place-hunters and corrupters of
men would have succeeded in letting loose all this latent evil, if the
millions of their followers were not also guilty? Will you venture, even
in these circumstances, to break a lance for the exclusion of evil from
the mental constitution of humanity?

You will accuse me of taking a one-sided view of war, and tell me that
it has also called out all that is finest and most noble in mankind,
heroism, self-sacrifice, and public spirit. That is true; but do not now
commit the injustice, from which psycho-analysis has so often suffered,
of reproaching it that it denies one thing because it affirms another.
It is no part of our intention to deny the nobility in human nature, nor
have we ever done anything to disparage its value. On the contrary, I
show you not only the evil wishes which are censored but also the
censorship which suppresses them and makes them unrecognizable. We dwell
upon the evil in human beings with the greater emphasis only because
others deny it, thereby making the mental life of mankind not indeed
better, but incomprehensible. If we give up the one-sided ethical
valuation then, we are sure to find the truer formula for the relation
of evil to good in human nature.

Here the matter rests. We need not give up the results of our work of
dream-interpretation, even though we cannot fail to find them strange.
Perhaps later we shall be able to come nearer to understanding them by
another path. For the present let us hold fast to this: dream-distortion
is due to the censorship exercised, by certain recognized tendencies of
the ego, over desires of an offensive character which stir in us at
night during sleep. Obviously, when we ask ourselves why it is just at
night that they appear and what is the origin of these reprehensible
wishes, we find that there is still much to investigate and many
questions to answer.

It would, however, be wrong if we neglected to give due prominence at
this point to another result of these investigations. The dream-wishes
which would disturb our sleep are unknown to us; we first learn about
them by dream-interpretation; they are therefore to be designated
“unconscious at the moment” in the sense in which we have used the term.
But we must recognize that they are also more than unconscious at the
moment; for the dreamer denies them, as we have so frequently found,
even after he has learnt of them through the interpretation of his
dream. Here we have a repetition of the case which we first met with
when interpreting the slip of the tongue “hiccough,” where the
after-dinner speaker indignantly assured us that neither then nor at any
time had he been conscious of any feeling of disrespect towards his
chief. We ventured even then to doubt the value of this assertion and
assumed instead that the speaker was permanently ignorant of the
existence of this feeling within him. We meet with the same situation
every time we interpret a dream in which there is a high degree of
distortion, and this lends an added significance to our conception. We
are now prepared to assume that there are processes and tendencies in
mental life, of which we know nothing; have known nothing; have, for a
very long time, perhaps even never, known anything about at all. This
gives the term _unconscious_ a fresh meaning for us: the qualification
“at the moment” or “temporary” is seen to be no essential attribute, the
term may also mean _permanently unconscious_, not merely “latent at the
moment.” You see that later on we shall have to discuss this point
further.




                             TENTH LECTURE
                          SYMBOLISM IN DREAMS


We have found out that the distortion in dreams which hinders our
understanding of them is due to the activities of a censorship, directed
against the unacceptable, unconscious wish-impulses. But of course we
have not asserted that the censorship is the only factor responsible for
the distortion, and as a matter of fact a further study of dreams leads
to the discovery that there are yet other causes contributing to this
effect; that is as much as to say, if the censorship were eliminated we
should nevertheless be unable to understand dreams, nor would the
manifest dream be identical with the latent dream-thoughts.

This other cause of the obscurity of dreams, this additional
contribution to distortion, is revealed by our becoming aware of a gap
in our technique. I have already admitted to you that there are
occasions when persons being analysed really have no associations to
single elements in their dreams. To be sure, this does not happen as
often as they declare that it does; in very many instances the
association may yet be elicited by perseverance; but still there remain
a certain number of cases where association fails altogether or, if
something is finally extorted, it is not what we need. If this happens
during psycho-analytic treatment it has a certain significance which
does not concern us here; but it also occurs in the course of
interpretation of dreams in normal people, or when we are interpreting
our own. When we are convinced in such circumstances that no amount of
pressing is of any use, we finally discover that this unwelcome
contingency regularly presents itself where special dream-elements are
in question; and we begin to recognize the operation of some new
principle, whereas at first we thought we had only come across an
exceptional case in which our technique had failed.

In this way it comes about that we try to interpret these “silent”
elements, and attempt to translate them by drawing upon our own
resources. It cannot fail to strike us that we arrive at a satisfactory
meaning in every instance in which we venture on this substitution,
whereas the dream remains meaningless and disconnected as long as we do
not resolve to use this method. The accumulation of many exactly similar
instances then affords us the required certainty, our experiment having
been tried at first with considerable diffidence.

I am presenting all this somewhat in outline, but that is surely
allowable for purposes of instruction, nor is it falsified by so doing,
but merely made simpler.

We arrive in this way at constant translations for a series of
dream-elements, just as in popular books on dreams we find such
translations for everything that occurs in dreams. You will not have
forgotten that when we employ the method of free association such
constant substitutions for dream-elements never make their appearance.

Now you will at once say that this mode of interpretation seems to you
far more uncertain and open to criticism than even the former method of
free association. But there is still something more to be said: when we
have collected from actual experience a sufficient number of such
constant translations, we eventually realize that we could actually have
filled in these portions of the interpretation from our own knowledge,
and that they really could have been understood without using the
dreamer’s associations. How it is that we are bound to know their
meaning is a matter which will be dealt with in the second half of our
discussion.

We call a constant relation of this kind between a dream-element and its
translation a _symbolic_ one, and the dream-element itself a _symbol_ of
the unconscious dream-thought. You will remember that some time ago,
when we were examining the different relations which may exist between
dream-elements and the thoughts proper underlying them, I distinguished
three relations: substitution of the part for the whole, allusion, and
imagery. I told you then that there was a fourth possible relation, but
I did not tell you what it was. This fourth relation is the symbolic,
which I am now introducing; there are connected with it certain very
interesting points for discussion, to which we will turn attention
before setting forth our special observations on this subject. Symbolism
is perhaps the most remarkable part of our theory of dreams.

First of all: since the relation between a symbol and the idea
symbolized is an invariable one, the latter being as it were a
translation of the former, symbolism does in some measure realize the
ideal of both ancient and popular dream-interpretation, one from which
we have moved very far in our technique. Symbols make it possible for us
in certain circumstances to interpret a dream without questioning the
dreamer, who indeed in any case can tell us nothing about the symbols.
If the symbols commonly appearing in dreams are known, and also the
personality of the dreamer, the conditions under which he lives, and the
impressions in his mind after which his dream occurred, we are often in
a position to interpret it straightaway; to translate it at sight, as it
were. Such a feat flatters the vanity of the interpreter and impresses
the dreamer; it is in pleasing contrast to the laborious method of
questioning the latter. But do not let this lead you away: it is no part
of our task to perform tricks nor is that method of interpretation which
is based on a knowledge of symbolism one which can replace, or even
compare with, that of free association. It is complementary to this
latter, and the results it yields are only useful when applied in
connection with the latter. As regards our knowledge of the dreamer’s
mental situation, moreover, you must reflect that you have not only to
interpret dreams of people whom you know well; that, as a rule, you know
nothing of the events of the previous day which stimulated the dream;
and that the associations of the person analysed are the very source
from which we obtain our knowledge of what we call the mental situation.

Further, it is especially remarkable, particularly with reference to
certain considerations upon which we shall touch later, that the most
strenuous opposition has manifested itself again here, over this
question of the existence of a symbolic relation between the dream and
the unconscious. Even persons of judgement and standing, who in other
respects have gone a long way with psycho-analysis, have renounced their
adherence at this point. This behaviour is the more remarkable when we
remember two things: first, that symbolism is not peculiar to dreams,
nor exclusively characteristic of them; and, in the second place, that
the use of symbolism in dreams was not one of the discoveries of
psycho-analysis, although this science has certainly not been wanting in
surprising discoveries. If we must ascribe priority in this field to
anyone in modern times, the discoverer must be recognized in the
philosopher K. A. Scherner (1861); psycho-analysis has confirmed his
discovery, although modifying it in certain important respects.

Now you will wish to hear something about the nature of dream-symbolism
and will want some examples. I will gladly tell you what I know, but I
confess that our knowledge is less full than we could wish.

The symbolic relation is essentially that of a comparison, but not any
kind of comparison. We must suspect that this comparison is subject to
particular conditions, although we cannot say what these conditions are.
Not everything with which an object or an occurrence can be compared
appears in dreams as symbolic of it, and, on the other hand, dreams do
not employ symbolism for anything and everything, but only for
particular elements of latent dream-thoughts; there are thus limitations
in both directions. We must admit also that we cannot at present assign
quite definite limits to our conception of a symbol; for it tends to
merge into substitution, representation, etc., and even approaches
closely to allusion. In one set of symbols the underlying comparison may
be easily apparent, but there are others in which we have to look about
for the common factor, the _tertium comparationis_ contained in the
supposed comparison. Further reflection may then reveal it to us, or on
the other hand it may remain definitely hidden from us. Again, if the
symbol is really a comparison, it is remarkable that this comparison is
not exposed by the process of free association, and also that the
dreamer knows nothing about it, but makes use of it unawares; nay, more,
that he is actually unwilling to recognize it when it is brought to his
notice. So you see that the symbolic relation is a comparison of a quite
peculiar kind, the nature of which is as yet not fully clear to us.
Perhaps some indication will be found later which will throw some light
upon this unknown quantity.

The number of things which are represented symbolically in dreams is not
great. The human body as a whole, parents, children, brothers and
sisters, birth, death, nakedness—and one thing more. The only typical,
that is to say, regularly occurring, representation of the human form as
a whole is that of a _house_, as was recognized by Scherner, who even
wanted to attribute to this symbol an overwhelming significance which is
not really due to it. People have dreams of climbing down the front of a
house, with feelings sometimes of pleasure and sometimes of dread. When
the walls are quite smooth, the house means a man; when there are ledges
and balconies which can be caught hold of, a woman. Parents appear in
dreams as _emperor_ and _empress_, _king_ and _queen_ or other exalted
personages; in this respect the dream attitude is highly dutiful.
Children and brothers and sisters are less tenderly treated, being
symbolized by _little animals_ or _vermin_. Birth is almost invariably
represented by some reference to _water_: either we are falling into
water or clambering out of it, saving someone from it or being saved by
them, i.e. the relation between mother and child is symbolized. For
dying we have setting out upon a _journey_ or _travelling_ by train,
while the state of death is indicated by various obscure and, as it
were, timid allusions; _clothes_ and _uniforms_ stand for nakedness. You
see that here the dividing line between the symbolic and the allusive
kinds of representation tends to disappear.

In comparison with the poverty of this enumeration, it cannot fail to
strike us that objects and matters belonging to another range of ideas
are represented by a remarkably rich symbolism. I am speaking of what
pertains to the sexual life—the genitals, sexual processes and
intercourse. An overwhelming majority of symbols in dreams are sexual
symbols. A curious disproportion arises thus, for the matters dealt with
are few in number, whereas the symbols for them are extraordinarily
numerous, so that each of these few things can be expressed by many
symbols practically equivalent. When they are interpreted, therefore,
the result of this peculiarity gives universal offence, for, in contrast
to the multifarious forms of its representation in dreams, the
interpretation of the symbols is very monotonous. This is displeasing to
everyone who comes to know of it: but how can we help it?

As this is the first time in the course of these lectures that I have
touched upon the sexual life, I owe you some explanation of the manner
in which I propose to treat this subject. Psycho-Analysis sees no
occasion for concealments or indirect allusions, and does not think it
necessary to be ashamed of concerning itself with material so important;
it is of opinion that it is right and proper to call everything by its
true name, hoping in this way the more easily to avoid disturbing
suggestions. The fact that I am speaking to a mixed audience can make no
difference in this. No science can be treated as an oracular mystery, or
in a manner adapted to school-girls; the women present, by appearing in
this lecture-room, have tacitly expressed their desire to be regarded on
the same footing as the men.

The male genital organ is symbolically represented in dreams in many
different ways, with most of which the common idea underlying the
comparison is easily apparent. In the first place, the sacred number
_three_ is symbolic of the whole male genitalia. Its more conspicuous
and, to both sexes, more interesting part, the penis, is symbolized
primarily by objects which resemble it in form, being long and
upstanding, such as _sticks_, _umbrellas_, _poles_, _trees_ and the
like; also by objects which, like the thing symbolized, have the
property of penetrating, and consequently of injuring, the body,—that is
to say, pointed weapons of all sorts: _knives_, _daggers_, _lances_,
_sabres_; fire-arms are similarly used: _guns_, _pistols_ and
_revolvers_, these last being a very appropriate symbol on account of
their shape. In the anxiety-dreams of young girls, pursuit by a man
armed with a knife or rifle plays a great part. This is perhaps the most
frequently occurring dream-symbol: you can now easily translate it for
yourselves. The substitution of the male organ by objects from which
water flows is again easily comprehensible: _taps_, _watering-cans_, or
_springs_; and by other objects which are capable of elongation, such as
_pulley lamps_, _pencils which slide in and out of a sheath_, and so on.
_Pencils_, _penholders_, _nail-files_, _hammers_ and other _implements_
are undoubtedly male sexual symbols, based on an idea of the male organ
which is equally easily perceived.

The peculiar property of this member of being able to raise itself
upright in defiance of the law of gravity, part of the phenomena of
erection, leads to symbolic representation by means of _balloons_,
_aeroplanes_, and, just recently, _Zeppelins_. But dreams have another,
much more impressive, way of symbolizing erection; they make the organ
of sex into the essential part of the whole person, so that the _dreamer
himself flies_. Do not be upset by hearing that dreams of flying, which
we all know and which are often so beautiful, must be interpreted as
dreams of general sexual excitement, dreams of erection. One
psycho-analytic investigator, P. Federn, has established the truth of
this interpretation beyond doubt; but, besides this, Mourly Vold, a man
highly praised for his sober judgement, who carried out the experiments
with artificial postures of the arms and legs, and whose theories were
really widely removed from those of psycho-analysis (indeed he may have
known nothing about it), was led by his own investigations to the same
conclusion. Nor must you think to object to this on the ground that
women can also have dreams of flying; you should rather remind
yourselves that the purpose of dreams is wish-fulfilment, and that the
wish to be a man is frequently met with in women, whether they are
conscious of it or not. Further, no one familiar with anatomy will be
misled by supposing that it is impossible for a woman to realize this
wish by sensations similar to those of a man, for the woman’s sexual
organs include a small one which resembles the penis, and this little
organ, the clitoris, does actually play during childhood and in the
years before sexual intercourse the same part as the large male organ.

Male sexual symbols less easy to understand are certain _reptiles and
fishes_: above all, the famous symbol of the _serpent_. Why _hats and
cloaks_ are used in the same way is certainly difficult to divine, but
their symbolic meaning is quite unquestionable. Finally, it may be asked
whether the representation of the male organ by some other member, such
as the _hand_ or the _foot_, may be termed symbolic. I think the context
in which this is wont to occur, and the female counterparts with which
we meet, force this conclusion upon us.

The female genitalia are symbolically represented by all such objects as
share with them the property of enclosing a space or are capable of
acting as receptacles: such as _pits_, _hollows and caves_, and also
_jars and bottles_, and _boxes_ of all sorts and sizes, _chests_,
_coffers_, _pockets_, and so forth. _Ships_ too come into this category.
Many symbols refer rather to the uterus than to the other genital
organs: thus _cupboards_, _stoves_ and, above all, _rooms_. Room
symbolism here links up with that of houses, whilst _doors and gates_
represent the genital opening. Moreover, material of different kinds is
a symbol of woman,—_wood_, _paper_, and objects made of these, such as
_tables_ and _books_. From the animal world, _snails and mussels_ at any
rate must be cited as unmistakable female symbols; of the parts of the
body, the _mouth_ as a representation of the genital opening, and,
amongst buildings, _churches and chapels_ are symbols of a woman. You
see that all these symbols are not equally easy to understand.

The breasts must be included amongst the organs of sex; these, as well
as the larger hemispheres of the female body, are represented by
_apples, peaches and fruit_ in general. The pubic hair in both sexes is
indicated in dreams by _woods and thickets_. The complicated topography
of the female sexual organs accounts for their often being represented
by a _landscape_ with rocks, woods and water, whilst the imposing
mechanism of the male sexual apparatus lends it to symbolization by all
kinds of complicated and indescribable _machinery_.

Yet another noteworthy symbol of the female genital organ is a
_jewel-case_, whilst “jewel” and “treasure” are used also in dreams to
represent the beloved person,[33] and _sweetmeats_ frequently stand for
sexual pleasures. Gratification derived from a person’s own genitals is
indicated by any kind of _play_, including playing the piano. The
symbolic representation of onanism by _sliding or gliding_ and also by
_pulling off a branch_ is very typical. A particularly remarkable
dream-symbol is the _falling out_ or _extraction of teeth_; the primary
significance of this is certainly castration as a punishment for
onanism. Special representations of sexual intercourse are less frequent
in dreams than we should expect after all this, but we may mention in
this connection rhythmical activities such as _dancing_, _riding_ and
_climbing_, and also _experiencing some violence_, e.g. being run over.
To these may be added certain manual occupations, and of course being
threatened with weapons.

You must not imagine that these symbols are either employed or
translated quite simply: on all sides we meet with what we do not
expect. For instance, it seems hardly credible that there is often no
sharp discrimination of the different sexes in these symbolic
representations. Many symbols stand for sexual organs in general,
whether male or female: for instance, a _little_ child, or a _little_
son or daughter. At another time a symbol which is generally a male one
may be used to denote the female sexual organ, or vice versa. This is
incomprehensible until we have acquired some knowledge of the
development of conceptions about sexuality amongst human beings. In many
cases this ambiguity of the symbols may be apparent rather than real;
and moreover, the most striking amongst them, such as weapons, pockets
and chests, are never used bisexually in this way.

I will now give a brief account, beginning with the symbols themselves
instead of with the objects symbolized, to show you from what spheres
the sexual symbols have for the most part been derived, and I will add a
few remarks relating particularly to those in which the attribute in
common with the thing symbolized is hard to detect. An instance of an
obscure symbol of this kind is the _hat_, or perhaps head-coverings in
general; this usually has a masculine significance, though occasionally
a feminine one. In the same way a _cloak_ betokens a man, though perhaps
sometimes without special reference to the organs of sex. It is open to
you to ask why this should be so. A _tie_, being an object which hangs
down and is not worn by women, is clearly a male symbol, whilst
_underlinen_ and _linen_ in general stands for the female. _Clothes and
uniforms_, as we have heard, represent nakedness or the human form;
_shoes and slippers_ symbolize the female genital organs. _Tables and
wood_ we have mentioned as being puzzling, but nevertheless certain,
female symbols; the _act of mounting_ ladders, steep places or stairs is
indubitably symbolic of sexual intercourse. On closer reflection we
shall notice that the rhythmic character of this climbing is the point
in common between the two, and perhaps also the accompanying increase in
excitation—the shortening of the breath as the climber ascends.

We have already recognized that _landscapes_ represent the female sexual
organs; mountains and rocks are symbols of the male organ; _gardens_, a
frequently occurring symbol of the female genitalia. _Fruit_ stands for
the breasts, not for a child. _Wild animals_ denote human beings whose
senses are excited, and, hence, evil impulses or passions. _Blossoms and
flowers_ represent the female sexual organs, more particularly, in
virginity. In this connection you will recollect that the blossoms are
really the sexual organs of plants.

We already know how rooms are used symbolically. This representation may
be extended, so that _windows and doors_ (entrances and exits from
rooms) come to mean the openings of the body; the fact of rooms being
_open or closed_ also accords with this symbolism: the _key_, which
opens them, is certainly a male symbol.

This is some material for a study of dream-symbolism. It is not
complete, and could be both extended and made deeper. However, I think
it will seem to you more than enough; perhaps you may dislike it. You
will ask: “Do I then really live in the midst of sexual symbols? Are all
the objects round me, all the clothes I wear, all the things I handle,
always sexual symbols and nothing else?” There really is good reason for
surprised questions, and the first of these would be: How do we profess
to arrive at the meaning of these dream-symbols, about which the dreamer
himself can give us little or no information?

My answer is that we derive our knowledge from widely different sources:
from fairy tales and myths, jokes and witticisms, from folk-lore, i.e.
from what we know of the manners and customs, sayings and songs, of
different peoples, and from poetic and colloquial usage of language.
Everywhere in these various fields the same symbolism occurs, and in
many of them we can understand it without being taught anything about
it. If we consider these various sources individually, we shall find so
many parallels to dream-symbolism that we are bound to be convinced of
the correctness of our interpretations.

The human body is, we said, according to Scherner frequently symbolized
in dreams by a house; by an extension of this symbolism, windows, doors
and gates stand for the entrances to cavities in the body, and the
façades may either be smooth or may have balconies and ledges to hold on
to. The same symbolism is met with in colloquialisms; for instance, we
speak of “a thatch of hair,” or a “tile hat,” or say of someone that he
is not right “in the upper storey.”[34] In anatomy, too, we speak of the
openings of the body as its “portals.”[35]

We may at first find it surprising that parents appear in our dreams as
kings and emperors and their consorts, but we have a parallel to this in
fairy tales. Does it not begin to dawn upon us that the many fairy tales
which begin with the words “Once upon a time there were a king and
queen” simply mean: “Once upon a time there were a father and mother?”
In family life the children are sometimes spoken of jestingly as
princes, and the eldest son as the crown prince. The king himself is
called the father of his people.[36] Again, in some parts, little
children are often playfully spoken of as little animals, e.g. in
Cornwall, as “little toad,” or in Germany as “little worm,” and, in
sympathizing with a child, Germans say “poor little worm.”

Now let us return to the house symbolism. When in our dreams we make use
of the projections of houses as supports, does that not suggest a
well-known, popular German saying, with reference to a woman with a
markedly developed bust: “She has something for one to hold on to” (_Die
hat etwas zum Anhalten_), whilst another colloquialism in the same
connection is: “She has plenty of wood in front of her house” (_Die hat
viel Holz vor dem Hause_), as though our interpretation were to be borne
out by this when we say that wood is a female maternal symbol.

There is still something to be said on the subject of wood. It is not
easy to see why wood should have come to represent a woman or mother,
but here a comparison of different languages may be useful to us. The
German word _Holz_ (wood) is said to be derived from the same root as
the Greek ὔλη, which means stuff, raw material. This would be an
instance of a process which is by no means rare, in that a general name
for material has come finally to be applied to a particular material
only. Now, in the Atlantic Ocean, there is an island named Madeira, and
this name was given to it by the Portuguese when they discovered it,
because at that time it was covered with dense forests; for in
Portuguese the word for wood is _madeira_. But you cannot fail to notice
that this _madeira_ is merely a modified form of the Latin _materia_,
which again signifies material in general. Now _materia_ is derived from
_mater_ = mother, and the material out of which anything is made may be
conceived of as giving birth to it. So, in the symbolic use of wood to
represent woman or mother, we have a survival of this old idea.

Birth is regularly expressed by some connection with water: we are
plunging into or emerging from water, that is to say, we give birth or
are being born. Now let us not forget that this symbol has a twofold
reference to the actual facts of evolution. Not only are all land
mammals, from which the human race itself has sprung, descended from
creatures inhabiting the water—this is the more remote of the two
considerations—but also every single mammal, every human being, has
passed the first phase of existence in water—that is to say, as an
embryo in the amniotic fluid of the mother’s womb—and thus, at birth,
emerged from water. I do not maintain that the dreamer knows this; on
the other hand, I contend that there is no need for him to know it. He
probably knows something else from having been told it as a child, but
even this, I will maintain, has contributed nothing to symbol-formation.
The child is told in the nursery that the stork brings the babies, but
then where does it get them? Out of a pond or a well—again, out of the
water. One of my patients who had been told this as a child (a little
count, as he was then) afterwards disappeared for a whole afternoon, and
was at last found lying at the edge of the castle lake, with his little
face bent over the clear water, eagerly gazing to see whether he could
catch sight of the babies at the bottom of the water.

In the myths of the births of heroes, a comparative study of which has
been made by O. Rank—the earliest is that of King Sargon of Akkad, about
2800 B.C.—exposure in water and rescue from it play a major part. Rank
perceived that this symbolizes birth in a manner analogous to that
employed in dreams. When anyone in his dream rescues somebody from the
water, he makes that person into his mother, or at any rate _a_ mother;
and in mythology, whoever rescues a child from water confesses herself
to be its real mother. There is a well-known joke in which an
intelligent Jewish boy, when asked who was the mother of Moses, answers
immediately: “The Princess.” He is told: “No, she only took him out of
the water.” “That’s what _she_ said,” he replies, showing that he had
hit upon the right interpretation of the myth.

Going away on a journey stands in dreams for dying; similarly, it is the
custom in the nursery, when a child asks questions as to the whereabouts
of someone who has died and whom he misses, to tell him that that person
has “gone away.” Here again, I deprecate the idea that the dream-symbol
has its origin in this evasive reply to the child. The poet uses the
same symbol when he speaks of the other side as “the undiscovered
country from whose bourne _no traveller_ returns.” Again, in everyday
speech it is quite usual to speak of the “last journey,” and everyone
who is acquainted with ancient rites knows how seriously the idea of a
journey into the land of the dead was taken, for instance, in ancient
Egyptian belief. In many cases the “Book of the Dead” survives, which
was given to the mummy, like a Baedeker, to take with him on the last
journey. Since burial-grounds have been placed at a distance from the
houses of the living, the last journey of the dead has indeed become a
reality.

Nor does sexual symbolism belong only to dreams. You will all know the
expression “a baggage” as applied contemptuously to a woman, but perhaps
people do not know that they are using a genital symbol. In the New
Testament we read: “The woman is the weaker _vessel_.” The sacred
writings of the Jews, the style of which so closely approaches that of
poetry, are full of expressions symbolic of sex, which have not always
been correctly interpreted and the exegesis of which, e.g. in the Song
of Solomon, has led to many misunderstandings.[37] In later Hebrew
literature the woman is very frequently represented by a house, the door
standing for the genital opening; thus a man complains, when he finds a
woman no longer a virgin, that “he has found the door open.” The symbol
“table” for a woman also occurs in this literature; the woman says of
her husband “I spread the table for him, but he overturned it.” Lame
children are said to owe their infirmity to the fact that the man
“overturned the table.” I quote here from a treatise by L. Levy in
Brünn: _Sexual Symbolism in the Bible and the Talmud_.

That ships in dreams signify women is a belief in which we are supported
by the etymologists, who assert that “ship” (_Schiff_) was originally
the name of an earthen vessel and is the same word as _Schaff_
(_schaffen_ = to make or produce). That an oven stands for a woman or
the mother’s womb is an interpretation confirmed by the Greek story of
Periander of Corinth and his wife Melissa. According to the version of
Herodotus, the tyrant adjured the shade of his wife, whom he had loved
passionately but had murdered out of jealousy, to tell him something
about herself, whereupon the dead woman identified herself by reminding
him that he, Periander, “had put his bread into a cold oven,” thus
expressing in a disguised form a circumstance of which everyone else was
ignorant. In the _Anthropophyteia_, edited by F. S. Kraus, a work which
is an indispensable text-book on everything concerning the sexual life
of different peoples, we read that in a certain part of Germany people
say of a woman who is delivered of a child that “her oven has fallen to
pieces.” The kindling of fire and everything connected with this is
permeated through and through with sexual symbolism, the flame always
standing for the male organ, and the fireplace or the hearth for the
womb of the woman.

If you have chanced to wonder at the frequency with which landscapes are
used in dreams to symbolize the female sexual organs, you may learn from
mythologists how large a part has been played in the ideas and cults of
ancient times by “Mother Earth” and how the whole conception of
agriculture was determined by this symbolism. The fact that in dreams a
room represents a woman you may be inclined to trace to the German
colloquialism by which _Frauenzimmer_ (_lit._ “woman’s room”) is used
for _Frau_, that is to say, the human person is represented by the place
assigned for her occupation. Similarly we speak of the Porte, meaning
thereby the Sultan and his government, and the name of the ancient
Egyptian ruler, Pharaoh, merely means “great court.” (In the ancient
Orient the courts between the double gates of the city were places of
assembly, like the market-place in classical times.) But I think this
derivation is too superficial, and it strikes me as more probable that
the room came to symbolize woman on account of its property of enclosing
within it the human being. We have already met with the house in this
sense; from mythology and poetry we may take towns, citadels, castles
and fortresses to be further symbols for women. It would be easy to
decide the point by reference to the dreams of people who neither speak
nor understand German. Of late years I have mainly treated foreign
patients, and I think I recollect that in their dreams rooms stand in
the same way for women, even though there is no word analogous to our
_Frauenzimmer_ in their language. There are other indications that
symbolism may transcend the boundaries of language, a fact already
maintained by the old dream-investigator, Schubert, in 1862.
Nevertheless, none of my patients were wholly ignorant of German, so
that I must leave this question to be decided by those analysts who can
collect instances in other countries from persons who speak only one
language.[38]

Amongst the symbols for the male sexual organ, there is scarcely one
which does not appear in jests, or in vulgar or poetic phrases,
especially in the old classical poets. Here, however, we meet not only
with such symbols as occur in dreams but also with new ones, e.g. the
_implements_ employed in various kinds of work, first and foremost, the
_plough_. Moreover, when we come to male symbols, we trench on very
extensive and much-contested ground, which, in order not to waste time,
we will avoid. I should just like to devote a few remarks to the one
symbol which stands, as it were, by itself; I refer to the number
_three_. Whether this number does not in all probability owe its sacred
character to its symbolic significance is a question which we must leave
undecided, but it seems certain that many tripartite natural objects,
e.g. the clover-leaf, are used in coats-of-arms and as emblems on
account of their symbolism. The so-called “French” lily with its three
parts and, again, the “trisceles,” that curious coat-of-arms of two such
widely separated islands as Sicily and the Isle of Man (a figure
consisting of three bent legs projecting from a central point), are
supposed to be merely disguised forms of the male sexual organ, images
of which were believed in ancient times to be the most powerful means of
warding off evil influences (_apotropaea_); connected with this is the
fact that the lucky “charms” of our own time may all be easily
recognized as genital or sexual symbols. Let us consider a collection of
such charms in the form of tiny silver pendants: a four-leaved clover, a
pig, a mushroom, a horseshoe, a ladder and a chimney-sweep. The
four-leaved clover has taken the place of that with three leaves, which
was really more appropriate for the purposes of symbolism; the pig is an
ancient symbol of fruitfulness; the mushroom undoubtedly symbolizes the
penis, there are mushrooms which derive their name from their
unmistakable resemblance to that organ (_Phallus impudicus_); the
horseshoe reproduces the contour of the female genital opening; while
the chimney-sweep with his ladder belongs to this company because his
occupation is one which is vulgarly compared with sexual intercourse.
(Cf. _Anthropophyteia_.) We have learnt to recognize his ladder in
dreams as a sexual symbol: expressions in language show what a
completely sexual significance the word _steigen_, to mount, has, as in
the phrases: _Den Frauen nachsteigen_ (to run after women) and _ein
alter Steiger_ (an old roué). So, in French, where the word for “step”
is _la marche_, we find the quite analogous expression for an old rake:
_un vieux marcheur_. Probably the fact that with many of the larger
animals sexual intercourse necessitates a mounting or “climbing upon”
the female has something to do with this association of ideas.

Pulling off a branch to symbolize onanism is not only in agreement with
vulgar descriptions of that act, but also has far-reaching parallels in
mythology. But especially remarkable is the representation of onanism,
or rather of castration as the punishment for onanism, by the falling
out or extraction of teeth; for we find in folk-lore a counterpart to
this which could only be known to very few dreamers. I think that there
can be no doubt that circumcision, a practice common to so many peoples,
is an equivalent and replacement of castration. And recently we have
learnt that certain aboriginal tribes in Australia practise circumcision
as a rite to mark the attaining of puberty (at the celebration of the
boy’s coming of age), whilst other tribes living quite near have
substituted for this practice that of knocking out a tooth.

I will end my account with these examples. They are only examples; we
know more about this subject and you can imagine how much richer and
more interesting a collection of this sort might be made, not by
dilettanti like ourselves, but by real experts in mythology,
anthropology, philology and folk-lore. We are forced to certain
conclusions, which cannot be exhaustive, but nevertheless will give us
plenty to think about.

In the first place, we are confronted with the fact that the dreamer has
at his command a symbolic mode of expression of which he knows nothing,
and does not even recognize, in his waking life. This is as amazing as
if you made the discovery that your housemaid understood Sanscrit,
though you know that she was born in a Bohemian village and had never
learnt that language. It is not easy to bring this fact into line with
our views on psychology. We can only say that the dreamer’s knowledge of
symbolism is unconscious and belongs to his unconscious mental life, but
even this assumption does not help us much. Up till now we have only had
to assume the existence of unconscious tendencies which are temporarily
or permanently unknown to us; but now the question is a bigger one and
we have actually to believe in unconscious knowledge, thought-relations,
and comparisons between different objects, in virtue of which one idea
can constantly be substituted for another. These comparisons are not
instituted afresh every time, but are ready to hand, perfect for all
time; this we infer from their unanimity in different persons, even
probably in spite of linguistic differences.

Whence is our knowledge of this symbolism derived? The usages of speech
cover only a small part of it, whilst the manifold parallels in other
fields are for the most part unknown to the dreamer; we ourselves had to
collate them laboriously in the first instance.

In the second place, these symbolic relations are not peculiar to the
dreamer or to the dream-work by which they are expressed; for we have
discovered that the same symbolism is employed in myths and fairy tales,
in popular sayings and songs, in colloquial speech and poetic phantasy.
The province of symbolism is extraordinarily wide: dream-symbolism is
only a small part of it; it would not even be expedient to attack the
whole problem from the side of dreams. Many of the symbols commonly
occurring elsewhere either do not appear in dreams at all or appear very
seldom; on the other hand, many of the dream-symbols are not met with in
every other department, but, as you have seen, only here and there. We
get the impression that here we have to do with an ancient but obsolete
mode of expression, of which different fragments have survived in
different fields, one here only, another there only, a third in various
spheres perhaps in slightly different forms. At this point I am reminded
of the phantasy of a very interesting insane patient, who had imagined a
“primordial language” (_Grundsprache_) of which all these symbols were
survivals.

In the third place, it must strike you that the symbolism occurring in
the other fields I have named is by no means confined to sexual themes,
whereas in dreams the symbols are almost exclusively used to represent
sexual objects and relations. This again is hard to account for. Are we
to suppose that symbols originally of sexual significance were later
employed differently and that perhaps the decline from symbolic to other
modes of representation is connected with this? It is obviously
impossible to answer these questions by dealing only with
dream-symbolism; all we can do is to hold fast to the supposition that
there is a specially close relation between true symbols and sexuality.

An important clue in this connection has recently been given to us in
the view expressed by a philologist (H. Sperber, of Upsala, who works
independently of psycho-analysis), that sexual needs have had the
largest share in the origin and development of language. He says that
the first sounds uttered were a means of communication, and of summoning
the sexual partner, and that in the later development the elements of
speech were used as an accompaniment to the different kinds of work
carried on by primitive man. This work was performed by associated
efforts, to the sound of rhythmically repeated utterances, the effect of
which was to transfer a sexual interest to the work. Primitive man thus
made his work agreeable, so to speak, by treating it as the equivalent
of and substitute for sexual activities. The word uttered during the
communal work had therefore two meanings, the one referring to the
sexual act, the other to the labour which had come to be equivalent to
it. In time the word was dissociated from its sexual significance and
its application confined to the work. Generations later the same thing
happened to a new word with a sexual signification, which was then
applied to a new form of work. In this way a number of root-words arose
which were all of sexual origin but had all lost their sexual meaning.
If the statement here outlined be correct, a possibility at least of
understanding dream-symbolism opens out before us. We should comprehend
why it is that in dreams, which retain something of these primitive
conditions, there is such an extraordinarily large number of sexual
symbols; and why weapons and tools in general stand for the male, and
materials and things worked on for the female. The symbolic relation
would then be the survival of the old identity in words; things which
once had the same name as the genitalia could now appear in dreams as
symbolizing them.

Further, our parallels to dream-symbolism may assist you to appreciate
what it is in psycho-analysis which makes it a subject of general
interest, in a way that was not possible to either psychology or
psychiatry; psycho-analytic work is so closely intertwined with so many
other branches of science, the investigation of which gives promise of
the most valuable conclusions: with mythology, philology, folk-lore,
folk psychology and the study of religion. You will not be surprised to
hear that a publication has sprung from psycho-analytic soil, of which
the exclusive object is to foster these relations. I refer to _Imago_,
first published in 1912 and edited by Hanns Sachs and Otto Rank. In its
relation to all these other subjects, psycho-analysis has in the first
instance given rather than received. True, analysis reaps the advantage
of receiving confirmation of its own results, seemingly so strange,
again in other fields; but on the whole it is psycho-analysis which
supplies the technical methods and the points of view, the application
of which is to prove fruitful in these other provinces. The mental life
of the human individual yields, under psycho-analytic investigation,
explanations which solve many a riddle in the life of the masses of
mankind or at any rate can show these problems in their true light.

I have still given you no idea of the circumstances in which we may
arrive at the deepest insight into that hypothetical “primordial
language,” or of the province in which it is for the most part retained.
As long as you do not know this you cannot appreciate the true
significance of the whole subject. I refer to the province of neurosis;
the material is found in the symptoms and other modes of expression of
nervous patients, for the explanation and treatment of which
psycho-analysis was indeed devised.

My fourth point of view takes us back to the place from which we started
and leads into the track we have already marked out. We said that even
if there were no dream-censorship we should still find it difficult to
interpret dreams, for we should then be confronted with the task of
translating the symbolic language of dreams into the language of waking
life. SYMBOLISM, then, is a second and independent factor in
dream-distortion, existing side by side with the censorship. But the
conclusion is obvious that it suits the censorship to make use of
symbolism, in that both serve the same purpose: that of making the dream
strange and incomprehensible.

Whether a further study of the dream will not introduce us to yet
another contributing factor in the distortion, we shall soon see. But I
must not leave the subject of dream-symbolism without once more touching
on the puzzling fact that it has succeeded in rousing such strenuous
opposition amongst educated persons, although the prevalence of
symbolism in myth, religion, art and language is beyond all doubt. Is it
not probable that, here again, the reason is to be found in its relation
to sexuality?




                            ELEVENTH LECTURE
                             THE DREAM-WORK


When you have successfully grasped the dream-censorship and symbolic
representation, you will not, it is true, have mastered dream-distortion
in its entirety, but you will nevertheless be in a position to
understand most dreams. To do so, you will make use of the two
complementary methods: you will call up the dreamer’s associations till
you have penetrated from the substitute to the thought proper for which
it stands, and you will supply the meaning of the symbols from your own
knowledge of the subject. We will speak later of certain doubtful points
which may arise in the process.

We can now return to a task which we attempted earlier with inadequate
equipment, when we were studying the relations between dream-elements
and the thoughts proper underlying them. We then determined the
existence of four such main relations: substitution of the part for the
whole, hints or allusions, symbolic connection, and plastic
word-representation (images). We will now try to deal with this subject
on a larger scale, by a comparison of the _manifest_ dream-content as a
whole with the _latent_ dream as laid bare by our interpretation.

I hope you will never again confuse these two things. If you succeed in
distinguishing between them, you will have advanced further towards an
understanding of dreams than in all probability most of the readers of
my _Interpretation of Dreams_ have done. Let me again remind you that
_the process by which the latent dream is transformed into the manifest
dream is called_ THE DREAM-WORK; while the reverse process, which seeks
to progress from the manifest to the latent thoughts, is our work of
interpretation; the work of interpretation therefore aims at demolishing
the dream-work. In dreams of the infantile type in which the obvious
wish-fulfilments are easily recognized, the process of dream-work has
nevertheless been operative to some extent, for the wish has been
transformed into a reality and, usually, the thoughts also into visual
images. Here no interpretation is necessary; we only have to retrace
both these transformations. The further operations of the dream-work, as
seen in the other types of dreams, we call _dream-distortion_, and here
the original ideas have to be restored by our interpretative work.

Having had the opportunity of comparing many dream-interpretations, I am
in a position to give you a comprehensive account of the manner in which
the dream-work deals with the material of the latent dream-thoughts. But
please do not expect to understand too much: it is a piece of
description which should be listened to quietly and attentively.

The first achievement of the dream-work is CONDENSATION; by this term we
mean to convey the fact that the content of the manifest dream is less
rich than that of the latent thoughts, is, as it were, a kind of
abbreviated translation of the latter. Now and again condensation may be
lacking, but it is present as a rule and is often carried to a very high
degree. It never works in the opposite manner, i.e. it never happens
that the manifest dream is wider in range or richer in content than is
the latent dream. Condensation is accomplished in the following ways:
(1) certain latent elements are altogether omitted; (2) of many
complexes in the latent dream only a fragment passes over into the
manifest content; (3) latent elements sharing some common characteristic
are in the manifest dream put together, blended into a single whole.

If you prefer to do so, you can reserve the term ‘condensation’ for this
last process, the effects of which are particularly easy to demonstrate.
Taking your own dreams, you will be able without any trouble to recall
instances of the condensation of different persons into a single figure.
Such a composite figure resembles A. in appearance, but is dressed like
B., pursues some occupation which recalls C., and yet all the time you
know that it is really D. The composite picture serves, of course, to
lay special emphasis upon some characteristic common to the four people.
And it is possible also for a composite picture to be formed with
objects or places, as with persons, provided only that the single
objects or places have some common attribute upon which the latent dream
lays stress. It is as though a new and fugitive concept were formed, of
which the common attribute is the kernel. From the superimposing of the
separate parts which undergo condensation there usually results a
blurred and indistinct picture, as if several photographs had been taken
on the same plate.

The formation of such composite figures must be of great importance in
the dream-work, for we can prove that the common properties necessary to
their formation are purposely manufactured where at first sight they
would seem to be lacking, as, for example, by the choice of some
particular verbal expression for a thought. We have already met with
instances of condensation and composite-formation of this sort; they
played an important part in originating many slips of the tongue. You
will remember the case of the young man who wished to “insort” a lady
(_beleidigen_ = insult, _begleiten_ = escort, composite word
_begleitdigen_). Besides, there are jokes in which the technique is
traceable to condensation of this sort. Apart from this, however, we may
venture to assert that this process is something quite unusual and
strange. It is true that in many a creation of phantasy we meet with
counterparts to the formation of the composite persons of our dreams,
component parts which do not belong to one another in reality being
readily united into a single whole by phantasy, as, for instance, in the
centaurs and fabulous animals of ancient mythology or of Boecklin’s
pictures. “Creative” phantasy can, in fact, invent nothing new, but can
only regroup elements from different sources. But the peculiar thing
about the way in which the dream-work proceeds is this: its material
consists of thoughts, some of which may be objectionable and
disagreeable, but which nevertheless are correctly formed and expressed.
The dream-work transmutes these thoughts into another form, and it is
curious and incomprehensible that in this process of translation—of
rendering them, as it were, into another script or language—the means of
blending and combining are employed. The translator’s endeavour in other
cases must surely be to respect the distinctions observed in the text,
and especially to differentiate between things which are similar but not
the same; the dream-work, on the contrary, strives to condense two
different thoughts by selecting, after the manner of wit, an ambiguous
word which can suggest both thoughts. We must not expect to understand
this characteristic straight away, but it may assume great significance
for our conception of the dream-work.

Although condensation renders the dream obscure, yet it does not give
the impression of being an effect of the dream-censorship. Rather we
should be inclined to trace it to mechanical or economic factors;
nevertheless the censorship’s interests are served by it.

What condensation can achieve is sometimes quite extraordinary: by this
device it is at times possible for two completely different latent
trains of thought to be united in a single manifest dream, so that we
arrive at an apparently adequate interpretation of a dream and yet
overlook a second possible meaning.

Moreover, one of the effects of condensation upon the relationship
between the manifest and the latent dream is that the connection between
the elements of the one and of the other nowhere remains a simple one;
for by a kind of interlacing a manifest element represents
simultaneously several latent ones and, conversely, a latent thought may
enter into several manifest elements. Again, when we come to interpret
dreams, we see that the associations to a single manifest element do not
commonly make their appearance in orderly succession; we often have to
wait until we have the interpretation of the whole dream.

The dream-work, then, follows a very unusual mode of transcription for
the dream-thoughts; not a translation, word for word, or sign for sign;
nor yet a process of selection according to some definite rule, for
instance, as though the consonants only of the words were reproduced and
the vowels omitted; nor again what one might call a process of
representation, one element being always picked out to represent several
others. It works by a different and much more complicated method.

The second achievement of the dream-work is DISPLACEMENT. Fortunately
here we are not breaking perfectly fresh ground; indeed, we know that it
is entirely the work of the dream-censorship. Displacement takes two
forms: first, a latent element may be _replaced_, not by a part of
itself, but by something more remote, something of the nature of an
allusion; and, secondly, the _accent_ may be transferred from an
important element to another which is unimportant, so that the centre of
the dream is shifted as it were, giving the dream a foreign appearance.

Substitution by allusion is familiar to us in our waking thoughts also,
but with a difference; for it is essential in the latter that the
allusion should be easily comprehensible, and that the content of the
substitute should be associated to that of the thought proper. Allusion
is also frequently employed in wit, where the condition of association
in content is dispensed with and replaced by unfamiliar external
associations, such as similarity of sound, ambiguity of meaning, etc.
The condition of comprehensibility, however, is observed: the joke would
lose all its point if we could not recognize without any effort what is
the actual thing to which the allusion is made. But in dreams allusion
by displacement is unrestricted by either limitation. It is connected
most superficially and most remotely with the element for which it
stands, and for that reason is not readily comprehensible; and, when the
connection is traced, the interpretation gives the impression of an
unsuccessful joke or of a “forced,” far-fetched and “dragged in”
explanation. The object of the dream-censorship is only attained when it
has succeeded in making it impossible to trace the thought proper back
from the allusion.

Displacement of accent is not a legitimate device if our object be the
expression of thought; though we do sometimes admit it in waking life in
order to produce a comic effect. I can to some extent convey to you the
impression of confusion which then results, by reminding you of an
anecdote, according to which there was in a certain village a smith who
had committed a capital offence. The court decided that the smith was
guilty; but, since he was the only one of his trade in the village and
therefore indispensable, whereas there were three tailors living there,
one of these three was hanged in his place!

The third achievement of the dream-work is the most interesting from the
psychological point of view. It consists in the transformation of
thoughts into _visual images_. Let us be quite clear that not everything
in the dream-thoughts is thus transformed; much keeps its original form
and appears also in the manifest dream as thought or knowledge, on the
part of the dreamer; again, translation of them into visual images is
not the only possible transformation of thoughts. But it is nevertheless
the essential feature in the formation of dreams, and, as we know, this
part of the dream-work is, if we except one other case, the least
subject to variation; for single dream-elements, moreover, _plastic
word-representation_ is a process already familiar to us.

Obviously this achievement is by no means an easy one. In order to get
some idea of its difficulty, imagine that you had undertaken to replace
a political leading article in a newspaper by a series of illustrations;
you would have to abandon alphabetic characters in favour of
hieroglyphics. The people and concrete objects mentioned in the article
could be easily represented, perhaps even more satisfactorily, in
pictorial form; but you would expect to meet with difficulties when you
came to the portrayal of all the abstract words and all those parts of
speech which indicate relations between the various thoughts, e.g.
particles, conjunctions, and so forth. With the abstract words you would
employ all manner of devices: for instance, you would try to render the
text of the article into other words, more unfamiliar perhaps, but made
up of parts more concrete and therefore more capable of such
representation. This will remind you of the fact that most abstract
words were originally concrete, their original significance having
faded; and therefore you will fall back on the original concrete meaning
of these words wherever possible. So you will be glad that you can
represent the “possessing” of an object as a literal, physical “sitting
upon” it (possess = _potis_ + _sedeo_). This is just how the dream-work
proceeds. In such circumstances you can hardly demand great accuracy of
representation, neither will you quarrel with the dream-work for
replacing an element which is difficult to reduce to pictorial form,
such as the idea of breaking marriage vows, by some other kind of
breaking, e.g. that of an arm or leg.[39] In this way you will to some
extent succeed in overcoming the awkwardness of rendering alphabetic
characters into hieroglyphs.

When you come to represent those parts of speech which indicate
thought-relations, e.g. “because,” “therefore,” “but,” and so on, you
have no such means as those described to assist you; so that these parts
of the text must be lost, so far as your translation into pictorial form
is concerned. Similarly, the content of the dream-thoughts is resolved
by the dream-work into its ‘raw material,’ consisting of objects and
activities. You may be satisfied if there is any possibility of
indicating somehow, by a more minute elaboration of the images, certain
relations which cannot be represented in themselves. In a precisely
similar manner the dream-work succeeds in expressing much of the content
of the latent thoughts by means of peculiarities in the _form_ of the
manifest dream, by its distinctness or obscurity, its division into
various parts, etc. The number of parts into which a dream is divided
corresponds as a rule with the number of its main themes, the successive
trains of thought in the latent dream; a short preliminary dream often
stands in an introductory or causal relation to the subsequent detailed
main dream; whilst a subordinate dream-thought is represented by the
interpolation into the manifest dream of a change of scene, and so on.
The form of dreams, then, is by no means unimportant in itself, and
itself demands interpretation. Several dreams in the same night often
have the same meaning, and indicate an endeavour to control more and
more completely a stimulus of increasing urgency. In a single dream, a
specially difficult element may be represented by “doubling” it, i.e. by
more than one symbol.

If we continue the comparison of dream-thoughts with the manifest dreams
representing them, we discover in all directions things we should never
have expected, e.g. that even nonsense and absurdity in dreams have
their meaning; in fact, at this point the contrast between the medical
and the psycho-analytic view of dreams becomes more marked than ever
before. According to the medical view, the dream is absurd because while
dreaming our mental activity has renounced its functions; according to
our view, on the other hand, the dream becomes absurd when it has to
represent a criticism implicit in the latent thoughts—the opinion: “It
is absurd.” The dream I told you, about the visit to the theatre (“three
tickets for one florin and a half”) is a good example of this: the
opinion thus expressed was as follows: “It was _absurd_ to marry so
early.”

Similarly, we find out when we interpret dreams what is the real meaning
of the doubts and uncertainties, so frequently mentioned by dreamers,
whether a certain element did actually appear in the dream, whether it
was really this and not rather something else. As a rule, there is
nothing in the latent thoughts corresponding with these doubts and
uncertainties; they originate wholly through the operation of the
censorship and are comparable to a not entirely successful attempt at
erasure.

One of our most surprising discoveries is the manner in which
_opposites_ in the latent dream are dealt with by the dream-work. We
know already that points of agreement in the latent material are
replaced by condensation in the manifest dream. Now contraries are
treated in just the same way as similarities, with a marked preference
for expression by means of the _same_ manifest element. An element in
the manifest dream which admits of an opposite may stand simply for
itself, or for its opposite, or for both together; only the sense can
decide which translation is to be chosen. It accords with this that
there is no representation of a “No” in dreams, or at least none which
is not ambiguous.

A welcome analogy to this strange behaviour of the dream-work is
furnished in the development of language. Many philologists have
maintained that in the oldest languages opposites such as: strong—weak,
light—dark, large—small, were expressed by the same root word
(_antithetical sense of primal words_). Thus, in old Egyptian “_ken_”
stood originally for both “strong” and “weak.” In speaking,
misunderstanding was guarded against in the use of such ambivalent words
by the intonation and accompanying gestures; in writing, by the addition
of a so-called “determinative,” that is to say, of a picture which was
not meant to be expressed orally. Thus, “_ken_” = “strong” was written
in such a way that after the letters there was a picture of a little man
standing upright; when “_ken_” meant “weak,” there was added the picture
of a man in a slack, crouching attitude. Only at a later period did the
two opposite meanings of the same primal word come to be designated in
two different ways by slight modifications of the original. Thus, from
“_ken_” meaning “strong—weak” were derived two words: “_ken_” = “strong”
and “_kan_” = “weak.” Nor is it only the oldest languages, in the last
stages of their development, which have retained many survivals of these
early words capable of meaning either of two opposites, but the same is
true of much younger languages, even those which are to-day still
living. I will quote some illustrations of this taken from the work of
C. Abel (1884):

In Latin, such ambivalent words are:

      _altus_ = high or deep. _sacer_ = sacred or accursed.

As examples of modifications of the original root, I quote:

      _clamare_ = to shout. _clam_ = quietly, silently, secretly.
      _siccus_ = dry. _succus_ = juice.

and, in German, _Stimme_ = voice. _stumm_ = dumb.

A comparison of kindred languages yields a large number of examples:

      English: lock = to shut. German: _Loch_ = hole. _Lücke_ = gap.
      English: cleave.[40] German: _kleben_ = to stick, adhere.

The English word “without,” originally carrying with it both a positive
and a negative connotation, is to-day used in the negative sense only,
but it is clear that “with” has the signification, not merely of “adding
to,” but of “depriving of,” from the compounds “withdraw,” “withhold”
(cf. the German _wieder_).

Yet another peculiarity of the dream-work has its counterpart in the
development of language. In ancient Egyptian, as well as in other later
languages, the sequence of sounds was transposed so as to result in
different words for the same fundamental idea. Examples of this kind of
parallels between English and German words may be quoted:

      _Topf_ (pot)—pot. Boat—tub. Hurry—_Ruhe_ (rest). _Balken_
      (beam)—_Kloben_ (club). wait—_täuwen_ (to wait).

Parallels between Latin and German:—

      _capere_—_packen_ (to seize). _ren_—_Niere_ (kidney).

Such transpositions as have taken place here in the case of single words
are made by the dream-work in a variety of ways. The inversion of the
meaning, i.e. substitution by the opposite, is a device with which we
are already familiar; but, besides this, we find in dreams inversion of
situations or of the relations existing between two persons, as though
the scene were laid in a “topsy-turvy” world. In dreams often enough the
hare shoots the hunter. Again, inversion is met with in the sequence of
events, so that in dreams cause follows effect, which reminds us of what
sometimes happens in a third-rate theatrical performance, when first the
hero falls and then the shot which kills him is fired from the wings. Or
there are dreams in which the whole arrangement of the elements is
inverted, so that in interpreting them the last must be taken first, and
the first last, in order to make sense at all. You remember that we also
found this in our study of dream-symbolism, in which the act of plunging
or falling into water has the same meaning as that of emerging from
water, namely, giving birth or being born, and going up steps or a
ladder means the same as coming down them. We cannot fail to recognize
the advantage reaped for dream-distortion by this freedom from
restrictions in representing the dream-thoughts.

These features of the dream-work may be termed _archaic_. They cling to
the primitive modes of expression of languages or scripts, and yield the
same difficulties, which we shall touch upon later in the course of some
critical observations on this topic.

Now let us consider some other aspects of the subject. Clearly what has
to be accomplished by the dream-work is the transformation of the latent
thoughts, as expressed in words, into perceptual forms, most commonly
into visual images. Now our thoughts originated in such perceptual
forms; their earliest material and the first stages in their development
consisted of sense-impressions, or, more accurately, of memory-pictures
of these. It was later that words were attached to these pictures and
then connected so as to form thoughts. So that the dream-work subjects
our thoughts to a _regressive_ process and retraces the steps in their
development; in the course of this REGRESSION all new acquisitions won
during this development of memory-pictures into thoughts must
necessarily fall away.

This then is what we mean by the dream-work. Beside what we have learnt
of its processes our interest in the manifest dream is bound to recede
far into the background; I will, however, devote still a few more
remarks to the manifest dream, for, after all, that is the only part of
the dream with which we have any direct acquaintance.

It is natural that the manifest dream should lose some of its importance
in our eyes. It must strike us as a matter of indifference whether it is
carefully composed or split up into a succession of disconnected
pictures. Even when the outward form of the dream is apparently full of
meaning, we know that this appearance has been arrived at by the process
of dream-distortion, and can have as little organic connection with the
inner content of the dream as exists between the _façade_ of an Italian
church and its general structure and ground-plan. At times, however,
this _façade_ of the dream has a meaning too, reproducing an important
part of the latent thoughts with little or no distortion. But we cannot
know this until we have interpreted the dream and thus arrived at an
opinion with regard to the degree of distortion present. A similar doubt
obtains where two elements seem to be closely connected; such connection
may contain a valuable hint that the corresponding elements in the
latent dream are similarly related, but at other times we can convince
ourselves that what is connected in thought has become widely separated
in the dream.

In general we must refrain from attempting to explain one part of the
manifest dream by another part, as though the dream were a coherent
conception and a pragmatic representation. It is in most cases
comparable rather to a piece of Breccia stone, composed of fragments of
different kinds of stone cemented together in such a way that the
markings upon it are not those of the original pieces contained in it.
There is, as a matter of fact, one mechanism in the dream-work, known as
SECONDARY ELABORATION, the object of which is to combine the immediate
results of the work into a single and fairly coherent whole; during this
process the material is often so arranged as to give rise to total
misunderstanding, and for this purpose any necessary interpolations are
made.

On the other hand, we should not overrate the dream-work or attribute to
it more than is its due. Its activity is limited to the achievements
here enumerated; condensation, displacement, plastic representation and
secondary elaboration of the whole dream; these are all that it can
effect. Such manifestations of judgement, criticism, surprise, or
deductive reasoning, as are met with in dreams are not brought about by
the dream-work and are only very rarely the expression of subsequent
reflection about the dream; but are for the most part fragments of the
latent thoughts introduced into the manifest dream with more or less
modification and in a form suited to the context. Again, the dream-work
cannot create conversation in dreams; save in a few exceptional cases,
it is imitated from, and made up of, things heard or even said by the
dreamer himself on the previous day, which have entered into the latent
thoughts as the material or incitement of his dream. Neither do
mathematical calculations come into the province of the dream-work;
anything of the sort appearing in the manifest dream is generally a mere
combination of numbers, a pseudo-calculation, quite absurd as such, and
again only a copy of some calculation comprised in the latent thoughts.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that the interest which was
felt in the dream-work soon becomes directed instead towards the latent
thoughts which disclose themselves in a more or less distorted form
through the manifest dream. We are not justified, however, in a
theoretical consideration of the subject, in letting our interest stray
so far that we altogether substitute the latent thoughts for the dream
as a whole, and make some pronouncement on the latter which is only true
of the former. It is strange that the findings of psycho-analysis could
be so misused as to result in confusion between the two. The term
“dream” can only be applied to the _results of the dream-work_, i.e. to
the _form_ into which the latent thoughts have been rendered by the
dream-work.

This work is a process of a quite peculiar type; nothing like it has
hitherto been known in mental life. This kind of condensation,
displacement, and regressive translation of thoughts into images, is a
novelty, the recognition of which in itself richly rewards our efforts
in the field of psycho-analysis. You will again perceive, from the
parallels to dream-work, the connections revealed between
psycho-analytic and other research, especially in the fields of the
development of speech and thought. You will only realize the further
significance of the insight so acquired when you learn that the
mechanism of the dream-work is a kind of model for the formation of
neurotic symptoms.

I know too that it is not possible for us yet to grasp the full extent
of the fresh gain accruing to psychology from these labours. We will
only hint at the new proofs thereby afforded of the existence of
unconscious mental activities—for this indeed is the nature of the
latent dream-thoughts—and at the promise dream-interpretation gives of
an approach, wider than we ever guessed at, to the knowledge of the
unconscious life of the mind.

Now, however, I think the time has come to give you individual examples
of various short dreams, which will illustrate the points for which I
have already prepared you.




                            TWELFTH LECTURE
                EXAMPLES OF DREAMS AND ANALYSIS OF THEM


You must not be disappointed if I present you once more with fragments
of dream-interpretations, instead of inviting you to participate in the
interpretation of one fine long dream. You will say that after so much
preparation you surely have a right to expect that; and you will express
your conviction that, after successful interpretations of so many
thousands of dreams, it should long ago have been possible to collect a
number of striking examples by which the truth of all our assertions
about the dream-work and dream-thoughts could be demonstrated. Yes, but
there are too many difficulties in the way of fulfilling this wish of
yours.

In the first place, I must confess that there is nobody who makes the
interpretation of dreams his main business. In what circumstances, then,
do we come to interpret them? At times we may occupy ourselves, for no
particular purpose, with the dreams of a friend, or we may work out our
own dreams over a period of time in order to train ourselves for
psycho-analytic work; but chiefly we have to do with the dreams of
nervous patients who are undergoing psycho-analytic treatment. These
last dreams provide splendid material and are in no respect inferior to
those of healthy persons, but the technique of the treatment obliges us
to subordinate dream-interpretation to therapeutic purposes and to
desist from the attempt to interpret a large number of the dreams as
soon as we have extracted from them something of use for the treatment.
Again, many dreams which occur during the treatment elude full
interpretation altogether; since they have their origin in the whole
mass of material in the mind which is as yet unknown to us, it is not
possible to understand them until the completion of the cure. To relate
such dreams would necessarily involve revealing all the secrets of a
neurosis; this will not do for us, since we have taken up the problem of
dreams in preparation for the study of the neuroses.

Now I expect you would willingly dispense with this material and would
prefer to listen to the explanation of dreams of healthy persons or
perhaps of your own. But the content of these dreams makes that
impossible. One cannot expose oneself, nor anyone whose confidence has
been placed in one, so ruthlessly as a thorough interpretation of a
dream would necessitate; for, as you already know, they touch upon all
that is most intimate in the personality. Apart from the difficulty
arising out of the nature of the material, there is another difficulty
as regards relating the dreams. You are aware that the dream seems
foreign and strange to the dreamer himself; how much more so to an
outsider to whom his personality is unknown. The literature of
psycho-analysis shows no lack of good and detailed dream-analyses; I
myself have published some which formed part of the history of certain
pathological cases. Perhaps the best example of a dream-interpretation
is that published by O. Rank, consisting of the analysis of two
mutually-related dreams of a young girl. These cover about two pages of
print, while the analysis of them runs into 76 pages. It would need
almost a whole term’s lectures in order to take you through a work of
this magnitude. If we selected some fairly long and considerably
distorted dream we should have to enter into so many explanations, to
adduce so much material in the shape of associations and recollections,
and to go down so many sidetracks, that a single lecture would be quite
unsatisfying and would give no clear idea of it as a whole. So I must
ask you to be content if I pursue a less difficult course, and relate
some fragments from dreams of neurotic patients, in which this or that
isolated feature may be recognized. Symbols are the easiest features to
demonstrate and, after them, certain peculiarities of the regressive
character of dream-representation. I will tell you why I regard each of
the following dreams as worth relating.

1. A dream consisted only of two short pictures: _The dreamer’s uncle
was smoking a cigarette, although it was Saturday.—A woman was fondling
and caressing the dreamer as though he were her child._

With reference to the first picture, the dreamer (a Jew) remarked that
his uncle was a very pious man who never had done, and never would do,
anything so sinful as smoking on the Sabbath. The only association to
the woman in the second picture was that of the dreamer’s mother. These
two pictures or thoughts must obviously be related to one another; but
in what way? Since he expressly denied that his uncle would in reality
perform the action of the dream, the insertion of the conditional “if”
will at once suggest itself. “If my uncle, that deeply religious man,
were to smoke a cigarette on the Sabbath, then I myself might be allowed
to let my mother fondle me.” Clearly, that is as much as to say that
being fondled by the mother was something as strictly forbidden as
smoking on the Sabbath is to the pious Jew. You will remember my telling
you that in the dream-work all relations among the dream-thoughts
disappear; the thoughts are broken up into their raw material, and our
task in interpreting is to re-insert these connections which have been
omitted.

2. My writings on the subject of dreams have placed me to some extent in
the position of public consultant on the question, and for many years
now I have received letters from the most diverse quarters communicating
dreams to me or asking for my opinion. Naturally I am grateful to all
those who have given me sufficient material with their dreams to make an
interpretation possible, or have themselves volunteered one. The
following dream of a medical student in Munich dating from 1910, belongs
to this category; and I quote it because it may prove to you how hard it
is, generally speaking, to understand a dream until the dreamer has
given us what information he can about it. For I have a suspicion that
in the bottom of your hearts you think that the translating of the
symbols is the ideal method of interpretation and that you would like to
discard that of free association; I want, therefore, to clear your minds
of so pernicious an error.

July 18th, 1910. Towards morning I had the following dream: _I was
bicycling down a street in Tübingen, when a brown dachshund came rushing
after me and caught hold of one of my heels. I rode a little further and
then dismounted, sat down on a step and began to beat the creature off,
for it had set its teeth fast in my heel._ (The dog’s biting me and the
whole scene roused no unpleasant sensations.) _Two elderly ladies were
sitting opposite, watching me with grinning faces. Then I woke up and,
as has frequently happened before, with the transition to waking
consciousness the whole dream was clear to me._

In this instance symbolism cannot help us much, but the dreamer goes on
to tell us: “I recently fell in love with a girl, just from seeing her
in the street; but I had no means of introduction to her. I should have
liked best to make her acquaintance through her dachshund, for I am a
great animal-lover myself and was attracted by seeing that she was one
too.” He adds that several times he had separated fighting dogs very
skilfully, often to the amazement of the onlookers. Now we learn that
the girl who had taken his fancy was always seen walking with this
particular dog. She, however, has been eliminated from the manifest
dream; only the dog associated with her has remained. Possibly the
elderly ladies who grinned at him represented her, but the rest of what
he tells us does not clear up this point. The fact that he was riding a
bicycle in the dream was a direct repetition of the situation as he
remembered it, for he had not met the girl with the dog except when he
was bicycling.

3. When a man has lost someone dear to him, for a considerable period
afterwards he produces a special type of dream, in which the most
remarkable compromises are effected between his knowledge that that
person is dead and his desire to call him back to life. Sometimes the
deceased is dreamt of as being dead, and yet still alive because he does
not know that he is dead, as if he would only really die if he did know
it; at other times he is half dead and half alive, and each of these
conditions has its distinguishing marks. We must not call these dreams
merely nonsensical, for to come to life again is no more inadmissible in
dreams than in fairy tales, in which it is quite a common fate. As far
as I have been able to analyse such dreams, it appeared that they were
capable of a reasonable explanation, but that the pious wish to recall
the departed is apt to manifest itself in the strangest ways. I will
submit a dream of this sort to you, which certainly sounds strange and
absurd enough, and the analysis of which will demonstrate many points
already indicated in our theoretical discussions. The dreamer was a man
who had lost his father some years previously:—

_My father was dead but had been exhumed and looked ill. He went on
living, and I did all I could to prevent his noticing it._ Then the
dream goes on to other matters, apparently very remote.

That the father was dead we know to be a fact; but the exhumation had
not taken place in reality: indeed, the question of real fact has
nothing to do with anything that follows. But the dreamer went on to say
that after he returned from his father’s funeral one of his teeth began
to ache. He wanted to treat it according to the Jewish precept: “If thy
tooth offend thee, pluck it out,” and accordingly went to the dentist.
The latter, however, said that that was not the way to treat a tooth;
one must have patience with it. “I will put something in it,” he said,
“to kill the nerve, and you must come back in three days’ time, when I
will take it out again.” “This ‘taking out,’” said the dreamer suddenly,
“is the exhuming.”

Now was he right? True, the parallel is not exact, for it was not the
tooth which was taken out, but only a dead part of it. As a result of
experience, however, we can well credit the dream-work with inaccuracies
of this sort. We must suppose that the dreamer had, by a process of
condensation, combined the dead father with the tooth, which was dead
and which he yet retained. No wonder then that an absurdity was the
result in the manifest dream, for obviously not all that was said about
the tooth could apply to the father. What then are we to regard as the
_tertium comparationis_ between the father and the tooth,—what common
factor makes the comparison possible?

Such a factor must have existed, for the dreamer went on to observe that
he knew the saying that if one dreams of losing a tooth it means that
one is about to lose a member of his family.

We know that this popular interpretation is incorrect or at least
correct only in a very distorted sense. We shall therefore be the more
surprised actually to discover the subject thus touched upon behind the
other elements of the dream-content.

Without being pressed further, the dreamer then began to talk of his
father’s illness and death, and of the relations which had existed
between father and son. The illness had been a long one, and the care
and treatment of the invalid had cost the son a large sum of money. Yet
it never seemed too much to him, nor did his patience ever fail or the
wish occur to him that the end should come. He prided himself on his
true Jewish filial piety and on his strict observance of the Jewish law.
Does not a certain contradiction strike us here in the thoughts relating
to the dream? He had identified the tooth with the father. He wanted to
treat the former according to the Jewish law which commanded that a
tooth which causes pain and annoyance should be plucked out. His father
he also wanted to treat according to the precepts of the law, but here
the command was that he must pay no heed to expense and annoyance, must
take the whole burden upon himself, and not allow any hostile intention
to arise against the cause of the trouble. Would not the agreement
between the two situations be much more convincing if he had really
gradually come to have the same feelings towards his sick father as he
had towards his diseased tooth, that is to say, if he had wished for
death to put a speedy end to his father’s superfluous, painful and
costly existence?

I have no doubt that this was, in reality, his attitude towards his
father during the protracted illness and that his boastful assertions of
filial piety were designed to divert his mind from any recollections of
the sort. Under conditions such as these it is no uncommon thing for the
death-wish against the father to be roused, and to mask itself with some
ostensibly compassionate reflection, such as: “It would be a blessed
release for him.” But I want you particularly to notice that here in the
latent thoughts themselves a barrier has been broken down. The first
part of the thoughts was, we may be sure, only temporarily unconscious,
that is, during the actual process of the dream-work; the hostile
feelings towards the father, on the other hand, had probably been
permanently so, possibly dating from childhood and having at times,
during the father’s illness, crept as it were timidly and in a disguised
form into consciousness. We can maintain this with even greater
certainty of other latent thoughts which have unmistakably contributed
to the content of the dream. There are, it is true, no indications in it
of hostile feelings towards the father; but when we enquire into the
origin of such hostility in the life of the child we remember that fear
of the father arises from the fact that in the earliest years of life it
is he who opposes the sexual activity of the boy, as he is usually
compelled to do again, after puberty, from motives of social expediency.
This was the relation in which our dreamer stood to his father; his
affection for him had been tinged with a good deal of respect and dread,
the source of which was early sexual intimidation.

We can now explain the further phrases in the dream from the onanism
complex. “_He looked ill_” was an allusion to another remark of the
dentist’s—that it did not look well for a tooth to be missing just
there—but it also refers at the same time to the “looking ill” by which
the young man, during the period of puberty, betrays, or fears lest he
might betray, his excessive sexual activity. It was with a lightening of
his own heart that in the manifest dream the dreamer transferred the
look of illness from himself to his father, an inversion with which you
are familiar as a device of the dream-work. “_He went on living_”
accords both with the wish to recall the father to life and the promise
of the dentist to save the tooth. The phrase “_I did everything I could
to prevent his noticing_” is extremely subtly designed to lead us to
complete it with the words “that he was dead.” The only completion of
them that really makes sense, however, is again to be traced to the
onanism complex, where it is a matter of course that the young man
should do all he can to conceal his sexual life from his father.
Finally, I would remind you that the so-called “toothache dreams” always
refer to onanism, and the punishment for it that is feared.

You see how this incomprehensible dream is built up by a piece of
remarkable and misleading condensation, by omitting from it all the
thoughts that belong to the core of the latent train of thought, and by
the creation of ambiguous substitute-formations to represent those
thoughts which were deepest and most remote in time.

4. We have already tried repeatedly to get to the bottom of those
prosaic and banal dreams which have nothing absurd or strange in them,
but which suggest the question: Why should we dream about such
trivialities at all? I will therefore quote a fresh example of this sort
in the shape of three dreams connected with one another and dreamt by a
young lady in the course of a single night.

(_a_) _She was going through the hall in her house and struck her head
on a low-hanging chandelier with such force as to draw blood._ This
episode did not remind her of anything that had actually happened; her
remarks led in quite another direction: “You know how terribly my hair
is coming out. Well, yesterday my mother said to me: ‘My dear child, if
it goes on like this, your head will soon be as bald as your buttocks.’”
We see here that the head stands for the other end of the body. No
further assistance is required to understand the symbolism of the
chandelier: all objects capable of elongation are symbols of the male
organ. The real subject of the dream then is a bleeding at the lower end
of the body, caused by contact with the penis. This might still have
other meanings; the dreamer’s further associations show that the dream
has to do with the belief that menstruation results from sexual
intercourse with a man, a notion about sexual matters which is by no
means uncommon amongst immature girls.

(_b_) _The dreamer saw in a vineyard a deep hole which she knew had been
caused by the uprooting of a tree._ Her remark on this point was that
“the tree was _missing_,” meaning that she did not see the tree in the
dream; but the same phrase serves to express another thought, which
leaves us in no doubt as to the symbolic interpretation. The dream
refers to another infantile notion on the subject of sex, to the belief
that girls originally had the same genital organ as boys and that the
later conformation of this organ has been brought about by castration
(uprooting the tree).

(_c_) _The dreamer was standing in front of her writing-table drawer
which she knows so well that, if anyone touched it, she would
immediately be aware of it._ The writing-table drawer, like all drawers,
chests and boxes, is a symbol of the female genital. She knew that when
sexual intercourse (or, as she thought, any contact at all) has taken
place the genital shows certain indications of the fact, and she had
long had a fear of being convicted of this. I think that in all three
dreams the main emphasis lies on the idea of _knowing_. She had in mind
the time of childish investigations into sexual matters, of the results
of which she had been very proud at the time.

5. Here is another example of symbolism. But this time I must preface it
with a short account of the mental situation in which the dream
occurred. A man and a woman who were in love had spent a night together;
he described her nature as maternal, she was one of those women whose
desire to have a child comes out irresistibly during caresses. The
conditions of their meeting, however, made it necessary to take
precautions to prevent the semen from entering the womb. On waking the
next morning, the woman related the following dream:—

_An officer with a red cap was pursuing her in the street. She fled from
him and ran up the staircase, with him after her. Breathless, she
reached her rooms and slammed and locked the door behind her. The man
remained outside and, peeping through the keyhole in the door, she saw
him sitting on a bench outside, weeping._

In the pursuit by the officer with the red cap and the breathless
climbing of the stairs you will recognize the representation of the
sexual act. That the dreamer shuts her pursuer out may serve as an
example of the device of inversion so frequently employed in dreams, for
in reality it was the man who withdrew before the completion of the
sexual act. In the same way, she has projected her own feeling of grief
on to her partner, for it is he, who weeps in the dream, his tears at
the same time alluding to the seminal fluid.

You will certainly have heard it said at some time or other that
psycho-analysis maintains that all dreams have a sexual meaning. You are
now in a position yourselves to form an opinion as to the falseness of
this reproach. You have learnt of wish-fulfilment dreams, dealing with
the gratification of the most obvious needs—hunger, thirst, and the
longing for liberty—comfort-dreams and impatience-dreams, as well as
those which are frankly avaricious and egoistical. You may, however,
certainly bear it in mind that, according to the results of
psycho-analysis, dreams in which a marked degree of distortion is
present _mainly_ (but here again not exclusively) give expression to
sexual desires.

6. I have a special motive in giving many instances of the use of
symbols in dreams. In our first lecture I complained of the difficulty
of demonstrating my statements in such a way as to carry conviction with
regard to the findings of psycho-analysis, and since then you have
doubtless agreed with me. Now the separate propositions of
psycho-analysis are nevertheless so intimately related that conviction
on a single point easily leads to acceptance of the greater part of the
whole theory. It might be said of psycho-analysis that if you give it
your little finger it will soon have your whole hand. If you accept the
explanation of errors as satisfactory, you cannot logically stop short
of belief in all the rest. Now dream-symbolism provides another, equally
good, approach to such acceptance. I will recount to you a dream, which
has already been published, of a woman of the poorer classes, whose
husband was a watchman and of whom we may be sure that she had never
heard of dream-symbolism and psycho-analysis. You can then judge for
yourselves whether the interpretation arrived at with the help of sexual
symbols can justly be called arbitrary or forced.

“_... Then someone broke into the house and in terror she cried for a
watchman. But the watchman, accompanied by two tramps, had gone into a
church, which had several steps leading up to it. Behind the church
there was a mountain and, up above, a thick wood. The watchman wore a
helmet, gorget and cloak, and had a full brown beard. The two tramps,
who had gone along peaceably with him, had aprons twisted round their
hips like sacks. A path led from the church to the mountain and was
overgrown on both sides with grass and bushes which grew denser and
denser, and at the top of the mountain there was a regular wood._”

You will recognize without any trouble the symbols here employed: the
male organ is represented by the trinity of _three_ persons appearing,
whilst the female sexual organs are symbolized by a landscape with a
chapel, a mountain and a wood, and once more you have the act of going
up steps as symbolic of the sexual act. The part of the body called in
the dream “a mountain” is similarly termed in anatomy the mons veneris.

7. I will tell you another dream which is to be explained in the light
of symbolism, a dream, moreover, which is noteworthy and convincing from
the fact that the dreamer himself translated all the symbols, though he
brought no previous theoretical knowledge to the interpretation. This is
a very unusual circumstance and we have no accurate idea of the
conditions which give rise to it.

_He was walking with his father in a place which must have been the
Prater,[41] for they saw the Rotunda with a little building in front of
it, to which was made fast a captive balloon which looked rather slack.
His father asked him what it was all for; the son wondered at his
asking, but explained it nevertheless. Then they came to a court-yard,
where a large sheet of metal lay spread out. His father wanted to break
off a big piece, but looked round first in case anyone should notice
him. He said to his son that all the same he need only tell the overseer
and then he could take it straightaway. Some steps led down from this
court to a shaft, the sides of which were upholstered with some soft
stuff, something like a leather armchair. At the bottom of this shift
was a rather long platform and, beyond it, another shaft._

The following is the dreamer’s own interpretation:—“The Rotunda stands
for my genitals and the captive balloon in front of it for the penis,
which I have had to complain of for being limp.” A more detailed
translation would then run thus: the rotunda stands for the buttocks
(regularly included by children amongst the genitals), the smaller
structure in front is the scrotum. In the dream, his father asks him
what all this is, i.e. what are the purpose and function of the
genitals. To invert this situation so that the son asks the questions is
an obvious idea, and, since these questions were never asked in reality,
we must construe the dream-thoughts as a wish or take them in a
conditional sense: “If I had asked my father to explain....” The sequel
to this thought we shall find presently.

The court-yard where the sheet-metal lay is not in the first place to be
explained symbolically, but is a reference to the father’s place of
business. From motives of discretion I have substituted “sheet-metal”
for the actual material dealt with by him, but otherwise I have made no
alteration in the words of the dream. The dreamer had entered his
father’s business and had been much scandalized by the extremely
questionable practices upon which the high profits largely depended.
Hence the sequel to the dream-thought mentioned above would run: “(If I
had asked him), he would have deceived me as he deceives his customers.”
The dreamer himself gives a second explanation for the pulling off the
piece of metal which serves to represent commercial dishonesty: it
means, he says, the practice of masturbation. Not only is this an
explanation with which we have long been familiar, but it is well in
accordance with this interpretation that the secret practice of
masturbation should be expressed by the opposite idea (“_We may do it
openly_”). So the fact that this practice is imputed to the father, as
was the questioning in the first scene of the dream, is exactly what we
should expect. The dreamer immediately interpreted the shaft, on account
of the soft upholstering of the walls, as the vagina, and I, on my own
account, offer the remark that going-down as well as going-up stands for
sexual intercourse.

The details of the long platform at the bottom of the first shaft, and
beyond that the second shaft, were explained by the dreamer himself from
his own history. He had practised intercourse for some time and then
given it up on account of inhibitions, but hoped to be able to resume it
by the help of the treatment.

8. I quote the two following dreams, dreamt by a foreigner with marked
polygamous tendencies, because they may serve to illustrate the
statement that the dreamer’s own person is present in every dream, even
when it is disguised in the manifest content. The trunks in the dreams
are female symbols.

(_a_) _The dreamer was going on a journey and his luggage was being
taken to the station on a carriage. There were a number of trunks piled
one on the top of the other, and amongst them two large black boxes like
those of a commercial traveller. He said consolingly to someone: “You
see those are only going as far as the station.”_

He does, as a matter of fact, travel with a great deal of luggage, and
he also brings many stories about women to the treatment. The two black
trunks stand for two dark women who at the moment are playing the
principal part in his life. One of them wanted to follow him to Vienna,
but on my advice he had telegraphed to put her off.

(_b_) A scene at a customs house:—_A fellow-traveller opened his trunk
and said nonchalantly, smoking a cigarette: “There is nothing to declare
in that.” The customs official seemed to believe him, but felt in the
trunk again and found a strictly prohibited article. The traveller then
said in a resigned way: “Well, it can’t be helped.”_ The dreamer himself
is the traveller and I am the official. He is generally very
straightforward with me, but had made up his mind to conceal from me a
relation which he had recently formed with a lady, for he assumed quite
correctly that I knew her. He displaces on to a stranger the
embarrassing situation of being detected, so that he himself does not
seem to come into the dream at all.

9. Here we have an example of a symbol which I have not yet mentioned:—

_The dreamer met his sister with two friends who were themselves
sisters. He shook hands with these two, but not with his sister._

There was no real episode connected with this in his mind. Instead, his
thoughts went back to a time when his observations led him to wonder why
a girl’s breasts are so late in developing. The two sisters, therefore,
stand for the breasts; he would have liked to grasp them with his hand,
if only it had not been his sister.

10. Here is an example of death symbolism in dreams:—_The dreamer was
crossing a very high, steep, iron bridge, with two people whose names he
knew, but forgot on waking. Suddenly both of them had vanished and he
saw a ghostly man in a cap and an overall. He asked him whether he were
the telegraph messenger.... “No.” Or the coachman?... “No.” He then went
on_, and in the dream, had a feeling of great dread; on waking, he
followed it up with the phantasy that the iron bridge suddenly broke and
that he fell into the abyss.

When stress is laid upon the fact that people in a dream are unknown to
the dreamer, or that he has forgotten their names, they are, as a rule,
persons with whom he is intimately connected. The dreamer was one of a
family of three children; if he had ever wished for the death of the
other two, it would be only just that he should be visited with the fear
of death. With reference to the telegraph messenger, he remarked that
they always bring bad news. From his uniform, the man in the dream might
have been a lamp-lighter, who also puts out the lights, as the spirit of
death extinguishes the torch of life. With the coachman he associated
Uhland’s poem of the voyage of King Karl, and recalled a dangerous sail
on a lake with two companions, when he played the part of the king in
the poem. The iron bridge suggested to him a recent accident, also the
stupid saying: “Life is a suspension bridge.”

11. The following may be regarded as another example of a death-dream:—

_An unknown gentleman was leaving a black-edged visiting card on the
dreamer._

12. I give another dream which will interest you from several points of
view; it is to be traced partly, however, to a neurotic condition in the
dreamer:—

_He was in a train which stopped in the open country. He thought there
was going to be an accident and that he must make his escape, so he went
through all the compartments, killing everyone he met,—driver, guard,
and so on._

This dream recalls a story told him by a friend. On a certain Italian
line, an insane man was being conveyed in a small compartment, but by
some mistake a passenger was allowed to get in with him. The madman
murdered the other traveller. Thus the dreamer identified himself with
this insane man, his reason being that he was at times tormented by an
obsession that he must make away with “everyone who shared his
knowledge.” Then he himself found a better motivation for the dream. The
day before, he had seen at the theatre a girl he had meant to marry but
had given up because she gave him cause for jealousy. Knowing the
intensity which jealousy could assume in him, he would really have been
mad to want to marry her. That is to say, he thought her so unreliable
that his jealousy would have led him to murder everyone who got in his
way. The going through a number of rooms, or, as here, compartments, we
have already learnt to know as a symbol of marriage (the expression of
monogamy according to the rule of opposites).

With reference to the train’s stopping in the open country and the fear
of an accident, he told the following story:—

Once when such a sudden halt occurred on the line outside a station, a
young lady who was in the carriage said that perhaps there was going to
be a collision, and that the best thing to do was to raise the legs
high. This phrase “raise the legs” had associations with many walks and
excursions into the country, which he had shared with the girl mentioned
above in the happy early days of their love. Here was a new argument for
the contention that he would be mad to marry her now; nevertheless, my
knowledge of the situation led me to regard it as certain that there
existed in him all the same the desire to fall a victim to this form of
madness.




                           THIRTEENTH LECTURE
                ARCHAIC AND INFANTILE FEATURES IN DREAMS


Let us start afresh from our conclusion that, under the influence of the
censorship, the dream-work translates the latent dream-thoughts into
another form. These thoughts are of the same nature as the familiar,
conscious thoughts of waking life; the new form in which they are
expressed is, owing to many peculiar characteristics, incomprehensible
to us. We have said that it goes back to phases in our intellectual
development which we have long outgrown—to hieroglyphic writing, to
symbolic-connections, possibly to conditions which existed before the
language of thought was evolved. On this account we called the form of
expression employed by the dream-work _archaic_ or _regressive_.

From this you may draw the inference that a more profound study of the
dream-work must lead to valuable conclusions about the initial stages of
our intellectual development, of which at present little is known. I
hope it will be so, but so far this task has not been attempted. The era
to which the dream-work takes us back is “primitive” in a twofold sense:
in the first place, it means the early days of the _individual_—his
childhood—and, secondly, in so far as each individual repeats in some
abbreviated fashion during childhood the whole course of the development
of the human race, the reference is _phylogenetic_. I believe it not
impossible that we may be able to discriminate between that part of the
latent mental processes which belongs to the early days of the
individual and that which has its roots in the infancy of the race. It
seems to me, for instance, that symbolism, a mode of expression which
has never been individually acquired, may claim to be regarded as a
racial heritage.

This, however, is not the only archaic feature in dreams. You are all
familiar from actual experience with the peculiar _amnesia of childhood_
to which we are subject. I mean that the first years of life, up to the
age of five, six, or eight, have not left the same traces in memory as
our later experiences. True, we come across individuals who can boast of
continuous recollection from early infancy to the present time, but it
is incomparably more common for the opposite, a blank in memory, to be
found. In my opinion, this has not aroused sufficient surprise. At two
years old the child can speak well and soon shows his capacity for
adapting himself to complicated mental situations, and, moreover, says
things which he himself has forgotten when they are repeated to him
years later. And yet memory is more efficient in early years, being less
overburdened than it is later. Again, there is no reason to regard the
function of memory as an especially high or difficult form of mental
activity; on the contrary, excellent memory may be found in people who
are yet on a very low plane intellectually.

But I must draw your attention to a second peculiarity, based upon the
first—namely, that from the oblivion in which the first years of
childhood are shrouded certain clearly retained recollections emerge,
mostly in the form of plastic images, for the retention of which there
seems no adequate ground. Memory deals with the mass of impressions
received in later life by a process of selection, retaining what is
important and omitting what is not; but with the recollections retained
from childhood this is not so. They do not necessarily reflect important
experiences in childhood, not even such as must have seemed important
from the child’s standpoint, but are often so banal and meaningless in
themselves that we can only ask ourselves in amazement why just this
particular detail has escaped oblivion. I have tried, with the help of
analysis, to attack the problem of childhood amnesia and of the
fragments of recollection which break through it, and have come to the
conclusion that, whatever may appear to the contrary, the child no less
than the adult only retains in memory what is important; but that what
is important is represented (by the processes of condensation and, more
especially, of displacement, already familiar to you) in the memory by
something apparently trivial. For this reason I have called these
childhood recollections _screen-memories_; a thorough analysis can
evolve from them all that has been forgotten.

It is a regular task in psycho-analytic treatment to fill in the blank
in infantile memories, and, in so far as the treatment is successful to
any extent at all (very frequently, therefore) we are enabled to bring
to light the content of those early years long buried in oblivion. These
impressions have never really been forgotten, but were only inaccessible
and latent, having become part of the unconscious. But sometimes it
happens that they emerge spontaneously from the unconscious, and it is
in connection with dreams that this happens. It is clear that the
dream-life knows the way back to these latent, infantile experiences.
Many good illustrations of this are to be found in psycho-analytical
literature, and I myself have been able to furnish a contribution of the
sort. I once dreamt in a particular connection of someone who had
evidently done me a service and whom I saw plainly. He was a one-eyed
man, short, fat and high-shouldered; from the context I gathered that he
was a doctor. Fortunately I was able to ask my mother, who was still
living, what was the personal appearance of the doctor who attended us
at the place where I was born and which I left at the age of three; she
told me that he had only one eye and was short, fat and high-shouldered;
I learnt also of the accident which was the occasion of this doctor’s
being called in and which I had forgotten. This command of the forgotten
material of the earliest years of childhood is thus a further ‘archaic’
feature of dreams.

This knowledge has a bearing on another of the problems which up to the
present have proved insoluble. You will remember the astonishment caused
by our discovery that dreams have their origin in actively evil or in
excessive sexual desires, which have made both the dream-censorship and
dream-distortion necessary. Supposing now that we have interpreted a
dream of this sort, and the circumstances are specially favourable in
that the dreamer does not quarrel with the interpretation itself, he
does nevertheless invariably ask how any such wish could come into his
mind, since it seems quite foreign to him and he is conscious of
desiring the exact opposite. We need have no hesitation in pointing out
to him the origin of the wish he repudiates: these evil impulses may be
traced to the past, often indeed to a past which is not so very far
away. It may be demonstrated that he once knew and was conscious of
them, even if this is no longer so. A woman who had a dream meaning that
she wished to see her only daughter (then seventeen years old) lying
dead found, with our help, that at one time she actually had cherished
this death-wish. The child was the offspring of an unhappy marriage,
which ended in the speedy separation of husband and wife. Once when the
child was as yet unborn the mother, in an access of rage after a violent
scene with her husband, beat her body with her clenched fists in order
to kill the baby in her womb. How many mothers who to-day love their
children tenderly, perhaps with excessive tenderness, yet conceived them
unwillingly and wished that the life within them might not develop
further; and have indeed turned this wish into various actions,
fortunately of a harmless kind. The later death-wish against beloved
persons, which appears so puzzling, thus dates from the early days of
the relationship to them.

A father, whose dream when interpreted shows that he wished for the
death of his eldest and favourite child, is in the same way obliged to
recall that there was a time when this wish was not unknown to him. The
man, whose marriage had proved a disappointment, often thought when the
child was still an infant that if the little creature who meant nothing
to him were to die he would again be free and would make better use of
his freedom. A large number of similar impulses of hate are to be traced
to a similar source; they are recollections of something belonging to
the past, something which was once in consciousness and played its part
in mental life. From this you will be inclined to draw the conclusion
that such dreams and such wishes would not occur in cases where there
have been no changes of this sort in the relations between two persons,
that is to say, where the relation has been of the same character from
the beginning. I am prepared to grant you this conclusion, only I must
warn you that you have to consider, not the literal meaning of the
dream, but what it signifies on interpretation. It may be that the
manifest dream of the death of some beloved person was only using this
as a terrible mask, whilst really meaning something totally different,
or it is possible that the beloved person is an illusory substitute for
someone else.

This situation will, however, raise in you another and much more serious
question. You will say: “Even though this death-wish did at one time
actually exist and this is confirmed by recollection, that is still no
true explanation; for the desire has long since been overcome and surely
at the present time can exist in the unconscious merely as a
recollection, of no affective value, and not as a powerful exciting
agent. For this later assumption we have no evidence. Why is the wish
recollected at all in dreams?” This is a question which you are really
justified in asking; the attempt to answer it would take us far afield
and would oblige us to define our position with regard to one of the
most important points in the theory of dreams. But I must keep within
the limits of our discussion and must forbear to follow up this
question; so you must be reconciled to leaving it for the present. Let
us content ourselves with the actual evidence that this wish, long since
subdued, can be proved to have given rise to the dream, and let us
continue our enquiry whether other evil wishes also can be traced in the
same way to the past.

Let us keep to the death-wishes, which we shall certainly find mostly
derived from the unbounded egoism of the dreamer. Wishes of this sort
are very often found to be the underlying agents of dreams. Whenever
anyone gets in our way in life—and how often must this happen when our
relations to one another are so complicated!—a dream is immediately
prepared to make away with that person, even if it be father, mother,
brother or sister, husband or wife. It appeared to us amazing that such
wickedness should be innate in humanity, and certainly we were not
inclined to admit without further evidence that this result of our
interpretation of dreams was correct. But, when once we had seen that
the origin of wishes of this sort must be looked for in the past, we had
little difficulty in finding the period in the past of the individual in
which there is nothing strange in such egoism and such wishes, even when
directed against the nearest and dearest. A child in his earliest years
(which later are veiled in oblivion) is just the person who frequently
displays such egoism in boldest relief; invariably, unmistakable
tendencies of this kind, or, more accurately, surviving traces of them,
are plainly visible in him. For a child loves himself first and only
later learns to love others and to sacrifice something of his own ego to
them. Even the people whom he seems to love from the outset are loved in
the first instance because he needs them and cannot do without
them—again therefore, from motives of egoism. Only later does the
impulse of love detach itself from egoism: it is a literal fact that the
child learns how to love through his own egoism.

In this connection it will be instructive to compare a child’s attitude
towards his brothers and sisters with his attitude towards his parents.
The little child does not necessarily love his brothers and sisters, and
often he is quite frank about it. It is unquestionable that in them he
sees and hates his rivals, and it is well known how commonly this
attitude persists without interruption for many years, till the child
reaches maturity and even later. Of course it often gives place to a
more tender feeling, or perhaps we should say it is overlaid by this,
but the hostile attitude seems very generally to be the earlier. We can
most easily observe it in children of two and a half to four years old
when a new baby arrives, which generally meets with a very unfriendly
reception; remarks such as “I don’t like it. The stork is to take it
away again” are very common. Subsequently every opportunity is seized to
disparage the new-comer; attempts are even made to injure it and actual
attacks upon it are by no means unheard-of. If the difference in age is
less, by the time the child’s mental activity is more fully developed
the rival is already in existence and he adapts himself to the
situation; if on the other hand there is a greater difference between
their ages, the new baby may rouse certain kindly feelings from the
first, as an object of interest, a sort of living doll; and when there
is as much as eight years or more between them, especially if the elder
child is a girl, protective, motherly impulses may at once come into
play. But, speaking honestly, when we find a wish for the death of a
brother or a sister latent in a dream we need seldom be puzzled, for we
find its origin in early childhood without much trouble, or indeed,
quite often in the later years when they still lived together.

There is probably no nursery without violent conflicts between the
inhabitants, actuated by rivalry for the love of the parents,
competition for possessions shared by them all, even for the actual
space in the room they occupy. Such hostility is directed against older
as well as younger brothers and sisters. I think it was Bernard Shaw who
said: “If there is anyone whom a young English lady hates more than her
mother it is her elder sister.” Now there is something in this dictum
which jars upon us; it is hard enough to bring ourselves to understand
hatred and rivalry between brothers and sisters, but how can feelings of
hate force themselves into the relation between mother and daughter,
parents and children?

This relationship is no doubt a more favourable one, also from the
children’s point of view; and this too is what our expectations require:
we find it far more offensive for love to be lacking between parents and
children than between brothers and sisters. We have, so to speak,
sanctified the former love while allowing the latter to remain profane.
Yet everyday observation may show us how frequently the sentiments
entertained towards each other by parents and grown-up children fall
short of the ideal set up by society, and how much hostility lies
smouldering, ready to burst into flame if it were not stifled by
considerations of filial or parental duty and by other, tender impulses.
The motives for this hostility are well known, and we recognize a
tendency for those of the same sex to become alienated, daughter from
mother and father from son. The daughter sees in her mother the
authority which imposes limits to her will, whose task it is to bring
her to that renunciation of sexual freedom which society demands; in
certain cases, too, the mother is still a rival, who objects to being
set aside. The same thing is repeated still more blatantly between
father and son. To the son the father is the embodiment of the social
compulsion to which he so unwillingly submits, the person who stands in
the way of his following his own will, of his early sexual pleasures
and, when there is family property, of his enjoyment of it. When a
throne is involved this impatience for the death of the father may
approach tragic intensity. The relation between father and daughter or
mother and son would seem less liable to disaster; the latter relation
furnishes the purest examples of unchanging tenderness, undisturbed by
any egoistic considerations.

Why, you ask, do I speak of things so banal and so well-known to
everybody? Because there exists an unmistakable tendency in people’s
minds to deny the significance of these things in real life and to
pretend that the social ideal is much more frequently realized than it
actually is. But it is better that psychology should tell the truth than
that it should be left to cynics to do so. This general denial is only
applied to real life, it is true; for fiction and drama are free to make
use of the motives laid bare when these ideals are rudely disturbed.

There is nothing to wonder at therefore if the dreams of a great number
of people bring to light the wish for the removal of their parents,
especially of the parent whose sex is the same as the dreamer’s. We may
assume that the wish exists in waking life as well, sometimes even in
consciousness if it can disguise itself behind another motive, as the
dreamer in our third example disguised his real thought by pity for his
father’s useless suffering. It is but rarely that hostility reigns
alone,—far more often it yields to more tender feelings which finally
suppress it, when it has to wait in abeyance till a dream shows it, as
it were, in isolation. That which the dream shows in a form magnified by
this very isolation resumes its true proportions when our interpretation
has assigned to it its proper place in relation to the rest of the
dreamer’s life. (H. Sachs.) But we also find this death-wish where there
is no basis for it in real life and where the adult would never have to
confess to entertaining it in his waking life. The reason for this is
that the deepest and most common motive for estrangement, especially
between parent and child of the same sex, came into play in the earliest
years of childhood.

I refer to that rivalry of affections in which sexual elements are
plainly emphasized. The son, when quite a little child, already begins
to develop a peculiar tenderness towards his mother, whom he looks upon
as his own property, regarding his father in the light of a rival who
disputes this sole possession of his; similarly the little daughter sees
in her mother someone who disturbs her tender relation to her father and
occupies a place which she feels she herself could very well fill.
Observation shows us how far back these sentiments date, sentiments
which we describe by the term _Oedipus complex_, because in the Oedipus
myth the two extreme forms of the wishes arising from the situation of
the son—the wish to kill the father and to marry the mother—are realized
in an only slightly modified form. I do not assert that the Oedipus
complex exhausts all the possible relations which may exist between
parents and children; these relations may well be a great deal more
complicated. Again, this complex may be more or less strongly developed,
or it may even become inverted, but it is a regular and very important
factor in the mental life of the child; we are more in danger of
underestimating than of overestimating its influence and that of the
developments which may follow from it. Moreover, the parents themselves
frequently stimulate the children to react with an Oedipus complex, for
parents are often guided in their preferences by the difference in sex
of their children, so that the father favours the daughter and the
mother the son; or else, where conjugal love has grown cold, the child
may be taken as a substitute for the love-object which has ceased to
attract.

It cannot be said that the world has shown great gratitude to
psycho-analytic research for the discovery of the Oedipus complex; on
the contrary, the idea has excited the most violent opposition in
grown-up people; and those who omitted to join in denying the existence
of sentiments so universally reprehended and tabooed have later made up
for this by proffering interpretations so wide of the mark as to rob the
complex of its value. My own unchanged conviction is that there is
nothing in it to deny or to gloss over. We ought to reconcile ourselves
to facts in which the Greek myth itself saw the hand of inexorable
destiny. Again, it is interesting to find that the Oedipus complex,
repudiated in actual life and relegated to fiction, has there come to
its own. O. Rank in a careful study of this theme has shown how this
very complex has supplied dramatic poetry with an abundance of motives
in countless variations, modifications and disguises, in short, subject
to just the distortion familiar to us in the work of the
dream-censorship. So we may look for the Oedipus complex even in those
dreamers who have been fortunate enough to escape conflicts with their
parents in later life; and closely connected with this we shall find
what is termed the _castration complex_, the reaction to that
intimidation in the field of sex or to that restraint of early infantile
sexual activity which is ascribed to the father.

What we have already ascertained has guided us to the study of the
child’s mental life, and we may now hope to find in a similar way an
explanation of the source of the other kind of prohibited wishes in
dreams, i.e. the excessive sexual desires. We are impelled therefore to
study the development of the sexual life of the child, and here from
various sources we learn the following facts. In the first place, it is
an untenable fallacy to suppose that the child has no sexual life and to
assume that sexuality first makes its appearance at puberty, when the
genital organs come to maturity. On the contrary he has from the very
beginning a sexual life rich in content, though it differs in many
points from that which later is regarded as normal. What in adult life
are termed “perversions” depart from the normal in the following
respects: (1) in a disregard for the barriers of species (the gulf
between man and beast), (2) in the insensibility to barriers imposed by
disgust, (3) in the transgression of the incest-barrier (the prohibition
against seeking sexual gratification with close blood-relations), (4) in
homosexuality and, (5) in the transferring of the part played by the
genital organs to other organs and different areas of the body. All
these barriers are not in existence from the outset, but are only
gradually built up in the course of development and education. The
little child is free from them: he does not perceive any immense gulf
between man and beast, the arrogance with which man separates himself
from the other animals only dawns in him at a later period. He shows at
the beginning of life no disgust for excrement, but only learns this
feeling slowly under the influence of education; he attaches no
particular importance to the difference between the sexes, in fact he
thinks that both have the same formation of the genital organs; he
directs his earliest sexual desires and his curiosity to those nearest
to him or to those who for other reasons are specially beloved—his
parents, brothers and sisters or nurses; and finally we see in him a
characteristic which manifests itself again later at the height of some
love-relationship—namely, he does not look for gratification in the
sexual organs only, but discovers that many other parts of the body
possess the same sort of sensibility and can yield analogous pleasurable
sensations, playing thereby the part of genital organs. The child may be
said then to be _polymorphously perverse_, and even if mere traces of
all these impulses are found in him, this is due on the one hand to
their lesser intensity as compared with that which they assume in later
life and, on the other hand, to the fact that education immediately and
energetically suppresses all sexual manifestations in the child. This
suppression may be said to be embodied in a theory; for grown-up people
endeavour to overlook some of these manifestations, and, by
misinterpretation, to rob others of their sexual nature, until in the
end the whole thing can be altogether denied. It is often the same
people who first inveigh against the sexual “naughtiness” of children in
the nursery and then sit down to their writing-tables to defend the
sexual purity of the same children. When they are left to themselves or
when they are seduced children often display perverse sexual activity to
a really remarkable extent. Of course grown-up people are right in not
taking this too seriously and in regarding it, as they say, as “childish
tricks” and “play,” for the child cannot be judged either by a moral or
legal code as if he were mature and fully responsible; nevertheless
these things do exist, and they have their significance both as evidence
of innate constitutional tendencies and inasmuch as they cause and
foster later developments: they give us an insight into the child’s
sexual life and so into that of humanity as a whole. If then we find all
these perverse wishes behind the distortions of our dreams, it only
means that dreams in _this respect also_ have regressed completely to
the infantile condition.

Amongst these forbidden wishes special prominence must still be given to
the incestuous desires, i.e. those directed towards sexual intercourse
with parents or brothers and sisters. You know in what abhorrence human
society holds, or at least professes to hold, such intercourse, and what
emphasis is laid upon the prohibitions of it. The most preposterous
attempts have been made to account for this horror of incest: some
people have assumed that it is a provision of nature for the
preservation of the species, manifesting itself in the mind by these
prohibitions because in-breeding would result in racial degeneration;
others have asserted that propinquity from early childhood has deflected
sexual desire from the persons concerned. In both these cases, however,
the avoidance of incest would have been automatically secured and we
should be at a loss to understand the necessity for stern prohibitions,
which would seem rather to point to a strong desire. Psycho-analytic
investigations have shown beyond the possibility of doubt that _an
incestuous love-choice_ is in fact the first and the regular one, and
that it is only later that any opposition is manifested towards it, the
causes of which are not to be sought in the psychology of the
individual.

Let us sum up the results which our excursion into child-psychology has
brought to the understanding of dreams. We have learnt not only that the
material of the forgotten childish experiences is accessible to the
dream, but also that the child’s mental life, with all its
peculiarities, its egoism, its incestuous object-choice, persists in it
and therefore in the unconscious, and that our dreams take us back every
night to this infantile stage. This corroborates the belief that _the
Unconscious is the infantile mental life_, and, with this, the
objectionable impression that so much evil lurks in human nature grows
somewhat less. For this terrible evil is simply what is original,
primitive and infantile in mental life, what we find in operation in the
child, but in part overlook in him because it is on so small a scale,
and in part do not take greatly to heart because we do not demand a high
ethical standard in a child. By regressing to this infantile stage our
dreams appear to have brought the evil in us to light, but the
appearance is deceptive, though we have let ourselves be dismayed by it;
we are not so evil as the interpretation of our dreams would lead us to
suppose.

If the evil impulses of our dreams are merely infantile, a reversion to
the beginnings of our ethical development, the dream simply making us
children again in thought and feeling, it is surely not reasonable to be
ashamed of these evil dreams. But the reasoning faculty is only part of
our mental life; there is much in it besides which is not reasonable,
and so it happens that, although it is unreasonable, we nevertheless are
ashamed of such dreams. We subject them to the dream-censorship and are
ashamed and indignant when one of these wishes by way of exception
penetrates our consciousness in a form so undisguised that we cannot
fail to recognize it; yes, we even at times feel just as much ashamed of
a distorted dream as if we really understood it. Just think of the
outraged comment of the respectable elderly lady upon her dream about
“love service,” although it was not interpreted to her. So the problem
is not yet solved, and it is still possible that if we pursue this
question of the evil in dreams we may arrive at another conclusion and
another estimate of human nature.

Our whole enquiry has led to two results which, however, merely indicate
the beginning of new problems and new doubts. In the first place: the
regression in dreams is one not only of form but of substance. Not only
does it translate our thoughts into a primitive form of expression, but
it also re-awakens the peculiarities of our primitive mental life—the
old supremacy of the ego, the initial impulses of our sexual life, even
restores to us our old intellectual possession if we may conceive of
symbolism in this way. And secondly: all these old infantile
characteristics, which were once dominant and solely dominant, must
to-day be accounted to the unconscious and must alter and extend our
views about it. “Unconscious” is no longer a term for what is
temporarily latent: the unconscious is a special realm, with its own
desires and modes of expression and peculiar mental mechanisms not
elsewhere operative. Yet the latent dream-thoughts disclosed by our
interpretation do not belong to this realm; rather they correspond to
the kind of thoughts we have in waking life also. And yet they are
unconscious: how is the paradox to be resolved? We begin to realize that
here we must discriminate. Something which has its origin in our
conscious life and shares its characteristics—we call it the “residue”
from the previous day—meets together with something from the realm of
the unconscious in the formation of a dream, and it is with these two
contributing elements that the dream-work is accomplished. The influence
of the unconscious impinging upon this residue probably constitutes the
condition for regression. This is the deepest insight into the nature of
dreams possible to us until we have explored further fields in the mind;
but soon it will be time to give another name to the unconscious
character of the latent dream-thoughts, in order to distinguish it from
that unconscious material which has its origin in the province of the
infantile.

We can of course also ask: What is it that forces our mental activity
during sleep to such regression? Why cannot the mental stimuli that
disturb sleep be dealt with without it? And if on account of the
dream-censorship the mental activity has to disguise itself in the old,
and now incomprehensible, form of expression, what is the object of
re-animating the old impulses, desires and characteristics, now
surmounted; what, in short, is the use of _regression in substance_ as
well as in _form_? The only satisfactory answer would be that this is
the one possible way in which dreams can be formed, that, dynamically
considered, the relief from the stimulus giving rise to the dream cannot
otherwise be accomplished. But this is an answer for which, at present,
we have no justification.




                           FOURTEENTH LECTURE
                            WISH-FULFILMENT


Shall I remind you once more of the steps by which we have arrived at
our present position? When in applying our technique we came upon the
distortion in dreams, we made up our minds to avoid it for the moment
and turned to the study of infantile dreams for some definite
information about the nature of dreams in general. Next, equipped with
the results of this investigation, we attacked the question of
dream-distortion directly, and I hope that bit by bit we have also
mastered that. Now, however, we are bound to admit that our findings in
these two directions do not exactly tally, and it behoves us to combine
and correlate our results.

Both enquiries have made it plain that the essential feature in the
dream-work is the transformation of thoughts into hallucinatory
experience. It is puzzling enough to see how this process is
accomplished, but this is a problem for general psychology, and we have
not to deal with it here. We have learnt from children’s dreams that the
object of the dream-work is to remove, by means of the fulfilment of
some wish, a mental stimulus which is disturbing sleep. We could make no
similar pronouncement with regard to distorted dreams until we
understood how to interpret them, but from the outset we expected to be
able to bring our ideas about them into line with our views on infantile
dreams. This expectation was for the first time fulfilled when we
recognized that all dreams are really children’s dreams; that they make
use of infantile material and are characterized by impulses and
mechanisms which belong to the childish mind. When we feel we have
mastered the distortion in dreams we must go on to find out whether the
notion that dreams are WISH-FULFILMENTS holds good of distorted dreams
also.

We have just subjected a series of dreams to interpretation, but without
taking the question of wish-fulfilment into consideration at all. I feel
certain that while we were talking about them the question repeatedly
forced itself upon you: “What has become of the wish-fulfilment which is
supposed to be the object of the dream-work?” Now this question is
important, for it is the one which our lay critics are constantly
asking. As you know, mankind has an instinctive antipathy to
intellectual novelties; one of the ways in which this shows itself is
that any such novelty is immediately reduced to its very smallest
compass, and if possible embodied in some catch-word. “Wish-fulfilment”
has become the catch-word for the new theory of dreams. Directly they
hear that dreams are said to be wish-fulfilments, the laity asks: “Where
does the wish-fulfilment come in?” and their asking the question amounts
to a repudiation of the idea. They can immediately think of countless
dreams of their own which were accompanied by feeling so unpleasant as
sometimes to reach the point of agonizing dread; and so this statement
of the psycho-analytical theory of dreams appears to them highly
improbable. It is easy to reply that in distorted dreams the
wish-fulfilment is not openly expressed, but has to be looked for, so
that it cannot be shown until the dreams have been interpreted. We know
too that the wishes underlying these distorted dreams are those which
are prohibited and rejected by the censorship, and that it is just their
existence which is the cause of distortion and the motive for the
intervention of the censorship. But it is difficult to make the lay
critic understand that we must not ask about the wish-fulfilment in a
dream before it has been interpreted; he always forgets this. His
reluctance to accept the theory of wish-fulfilment is really nothing but
the effect of the dream-censorship, causing him to replace the real
thought by a substitute, and following from his repudiation of these
censored dream-wishes.

Of course we ourselves must feel the need to explain why so many dreams
are painful in content; and in particular we shall want to know how we
come to have ‘anxiety-dreams.’ Here for the first time we are confronted
with the problem of the affects in dreams; a problem which deserves
special study, but one which we cannot concern ourselves with just now,
unfortunately. If the dream is a wish-fulfilment, it should be
impossible for any painful emotions to come into it: on this point the
lay critics seem to be right. But the matter is complicated by three
considerations which they have overlooked.

First, it may happen that the dream-work is not wholly successful in
creating a wish-fulfilment, so that part of the painful feeling in the
latent thoughts is carried over into the manifest dream. Analysis would
then have to show that these thoughts were a great deal more painful
than the dream which is formed from them; this much can be proved in
every instance. We admit then that the dream-work has failed in its
purpose, just as a dream of drinking excited by the stimulus of thirst
fails to quench that thirst. One is still thirsty after it and has to
wake up and drink. Nevertheless, it is a proper dream: it has renounced
nothing of its essential nature. We must say: “Ut desint vires, tamen
est laudanda voluntas.” The clearly recognizable intention remains a
praiseworthy one, at any rate. Such instances of failure in the work are
by no means rare, and one reason is that it is so much more difficult
for the dream-work to produce the required change in the nature of the
affect than to modify the content; affects are often very intractable.
So it happens that in the process of the dream-work the painful
_content_ of the dream-thoughts is transformed into a wish-fulfilment
while the painful _affect_ persists unchanged. When this occurs the
affect is quite out of harmony with the content, which gives our critics
the opportunity of remarking that the dream is so far from being a
wish-fulfilment that even a harmless content may be accompanied in it by
painful feelings. Our answer to this rather unintelligent comment will
be that it is just in dreams of this sort that the wish-fulfilling
tendency of the dream-work is most apparent, because it is there seen in
isolation. The mistake in this criticism arises because people who are
not familiar with the neuroses imagine a more intimate connection
between content and affect than actually exists, and so cannot
understand that there may be an alteration in the content while the
accompanying affect remains unchanged.

A second consideration, much more important and far-reaching but equally
overlooked by the laity, is the following. A wish-fulfilment must
certainly bring some pleasure; but we go on to ask: “To whom?” Of course
to the person who has the wish. But we know that the attitude of the
dreamer towards his wishes is a peculiar one: he rejects them, censors
them, in short, he will have none of them. Their fulfilment then can
afford him no pleasure, rather the opposite, and here experience shows
that this “opposite,” which has still to be explained, takes the form of
_anxiety_. The dreamer, where his wishes are concerned, is like two
separate people closely linked together by some important thing in
common. Instead of enlarging upon this I will remind you of a well-known
fairy-tale in which you will see these relationships repeated. A good
fairy promised a poor man and his wife to fulfil their first three
wishes. They were delighted and made up their minds to choose the wishes
carefully. But the woman was tempted by the smell of some sausages being
cooked in the next cottage and wished for two like them. Lo! and behold,
there they were—and the first wish was fulfilled. With that, the man
lost his temper and in his resentment wished that the sausages might
hang on the tip of his wife’s nose. This also came to pass, and the
sausages could not be removed from their position; so the second wish
was fulfilled, but it was the man’s wish and its fulfilment was most
unpleasant for the woman. You know the rest of the story: as they were
after all man and wife, the third wish had to be that the sausages
should come off the end of the woman’s nose. We might make use of this
fairy-tale many times over in other contexts, but here it need only
serve to illustrate the fact that it is possible for the fulfilment of
one person’s wish to be very disagreeable to someone else, unless the
two people are entirely at one.

It will not be difficult now to arrive at a still better understanding
of anxiety-dreams. There is just one more observation to be made use of
and then we may adopt an hypothesis which is supported by several
considerations. The observation is that anxiety-dreams often have a
content in which there is no distortion; it has, so to speak, escaped
the censorship. This type of dream is frequently an undisguised
wish-fulfilment, the wish being of course not one which the dreamer
would accept but one which he has rejected; anxiety has developed in
place of the working of the censorship. Whereas the infantile dream is
an open fulfilment of a wish admitted by the dreamer, and the ordinary
distorted dream is the disguised fulfilment of a repressed wish, the
formula for the anxiety-dream is that it is the open fulfilment of a
repressed wish. Anxiety is an indication that the repressed wish has
proved too strong for the censorship and has accomplished or was about
to accomplish its fulfilment in spite of it. We can understand that
fulfilment of a repressed wish can only be, for us who are on the side
of the censorship, an occasion for painful emotions and for setting up a
defence. The anxiety then manifested in our dreams is, if you like to
put it so, anxiety experienced because of the strength of wishes which
at other times we manage to stifle. The study of dreams alone does not
reveal to us why this defence takes the form of anxiety; obviously we
must consider the latter in other connections.

The hypothesis which holds good for anxiety-dreams without any
distortion may be adopted also for those which have undergone some
degree of distortion, and for other kinds of unpleasant dreams in which
the accompanying unpleasant feelings probably approximate to anxiety.
Anxiety-dreams generally wake us; we usually break off our sleep before
the repressed wish behind the dream overcomes the censorship and reaches
complete fulfilment. In such a case the dream has failed to achieve its
purpose, but its essential character is not thereby altered. We have
compared the dream with a night-watchman, a guardian of sleep, whose
purpose it is to protect sleep from interruption. Now night-watchmen
also, just like dreams, have to rouse sleepers when they are not strong
enough to ward off the cause of disturbance or danger alone.
Nevertheless we do sometimes succeed in continuing to sleep even when
our dreams begin to give us some uneasiness and to turn to anxiety. We
say to ourselves in sleep: “It is only a dream after all,” and go on
sleeping.

You may ask _when_ it happens that the dream-wish is able to overcome
the censorship. This may depend either on the wish or on the censorship:
it may be that for unknown reasons the strength of the wish at times
becomes excessive; but our impression is that it is more often the
attitude of the censorship which is responsible for this shifting in the
balance of power. We have already heard that the censorship works with
varying intensity in each individual instance, treating the different
elements with different degrees of strictness; now we may add that it is
very variable in its general behaviour and does not show itself always
equally severe towards the same element. If then it chances that the
censorship feels itself for once powerless against some dream-wish which
threatens to overthrow it, it then, instead of making use of distortion,
employs the last weapon left to it and destroys sleep by bringing about
an access of anxiety.

At this point it strikes us that we still have no idea why these evil,
rejected wishes rise up just at night-time, so as to disturb us when we
sleep. The answer can hardly be found except in another hypothesis which
goes back to the nature of sleep itself. During the day the heavy
pressure of a censorship is exercised upon these wishes and, as a rule,
it is impossible for them to make themselves felt at all. But in the
night it is probable that this censorship, like all the other interests
of mental life, is suspended, or at least very much weakened, in favour
of the single desire for sleep. So it is due to this partial abrogation
of the censorship at night that the forbidden wishes can again become
active. There are nervous people suffering from insomnia who confess
that their sleeplessness was voluntary in the first instance; for they
did not dare to go to sleep because they were afraid of their
dreams—that is to say, they feared the consequences of the diminished
vigilance of the censorship. You will have no difficulty in
understanding that this curtailment of the censorship does not argue any
flagrant carelessness: sleep impairs our motor functions; even if our
evil intentions do begin to stir within us the utmost they can do is to
produce a dream, which is for all practical purposes harmless; and it is
this comforting circumstance which gives rise to the sleeper’s remark,
made, it is true, in the night but yet not part of his dream-life: “It
is only a dream.” So we let it have its way and continue to sleep.

Thirdly, if you call to mind our idea that the dreamer striving against
his own wishes is like a combination of two persons, separate and yet
somehow intimately united, you will be able to understand another
possible way in which something that is highly unpleasant may be brought
about through wish-fulfilment: I am speaking of punishment. Here again
the fairy-tale of the three wishes may help to make things clear. The
sausages on the plate were the direct fulfilment of the first person’s
(the woman’s) wish; the sausages on the tip of her nose were the
fulfilment of the second person’s (the husband’s) wish, but at the same
time they were the punishment for the foolish wish of the wife. In the
neuroses we shall meet with wishes corresponding in motivation to the
third wish of the fairy-tale, the only one left. There are many such
punishment tendencies in the mental life of man; they are very strong
and we may well regard them as responsible for some of our painful
dreams. Now you will probably think that with all this there is very
little of the famous wish-fulfilment left; but on closer consideration
you will admit that you are wrong. In comparison with the manifold
possibilities (to be discussed later) of what dreams might be—according
to some writers, what they actually are—the solution: wish-fulfilment,
anxiety-fulfilment, punishment-fulfilment, is surely quite a narrow one.
Add to this, that anxiety is the direct opposite of a wish and that
opposites lie very near one another in association and, as we have
learned, actually coincide in the unconscious. Moreover, punishment
itself is the fulfilment of a wish, namely, the wish of the other,
censoring person.

On the whole then, I have made no concession to your objections to the
wish-fulfilment theory; we are bound, however, to demonstrate its
presence in any and every distorted dream, and we have certainly no
desire to shirk this task. Let us go back to the dream we have already
interpreted, about the three bad theatre tickets for one florin and a
half, from which we have already learnt a good deal. I hope you still
remember it: A lady, whose husband told her one day about the engagement
of her friend Elise who was only three months younger than herself,
dreamt on the following night that she and her husband were at the
theatre and that one side of the stalls was almost empty. Her husband
told her that Elise and her fiancé had wanted to go to the theatre too;
but could not, because they could only get such bad seats, three tickets
for a florin and a half. His wife said that they had not lost much by
it. We discovered that the dream-thoughts had to do with her vexation at
having been in such a hurry to marry and her dissatisfaction with her
husband. We may well be curious how these gloomy thoughts can have been
transformed into a wish-fulfilment, and what trace of it can be found in
the manifest content. Now we know already that the element “too soon,
too great a hurry,” was eliminated by the censorship; the empty stalls
are an allusion to this element. The puzzling phrase _three for one and
a half florins_ is now more comprehensible to us than at first, through
the knowledge of symbolism that we have acquired since then.[42] The
number _three_ really stands for a man and we can easily translate the
manifest element to mean: “to buy a man (husband) with the dowry.” (“I
could have bought one ten times better for my dowry.”) _Going to the
theatre_ obviously stands for marriage. _Getting the tickets too soon_
is in fact a direct substitute for “marrying too soon.” Now this
substitution is the work of the wish-fulfilment. The dreamer had not
always felt so dissatisfied with her premature marriage as she was on
the day when she heard of her friend’s engagement. She had been proud of
her marriage at the time and considered herself more highly favoured
than her friend. One hears that naïve girls, on becoming engaged,
frequently express their delight at the idea that they will now soon be
able to go to all plays and see everything hitherto forbidden them.

The indication of curiosity and a desire to “look on” evinced here
comes, without doubt, originally from the sexual ‘_gazing-impulse_,’
especially regarding the parents, and this became a strong motive
impelling the girl to marry early; in this manner going to the theatre
became an obvious allusive substitute for getting married. In her
vexation at the present time on account of her premature marriage she
therefore reverted to the time when this same marriage fulfilled a wish,
by gratifying her _skoptophilia_; and so, guided by this old
wish-impulse, she replaced the idea of marriage by that of going to the
theatre.

We may say that the example we have chosen to demonstrate a hidden
wish-fulfilment is not the most convenient one, but in all other
distorted dreams we should have to proceed in a manner analogous to that
employed above. It is not possible for me to do this here and now, so I
will merely express my conviction that such procedure will invariably
meet with success. But I wish to dwell longer upon this point in our
theory: experience has taught me that it is one of the most perilous of
the whole theory of dreams, exposed to many contradictions and
misunderstandings. Besides, you are perhaps still under the impression
that I have already retracted part of my statement by saying that the
dream may be either a wish-fulfilment, or its opposite, an anxiety or a
punishment, brought to actuality; and you may think this a good
opportunity to force me to make further reservations. Also I have been
reproached with presenting facts that seem obvious to myself in a manner
too condensed to carry conviction.

When anyone has gone as far as this in dream-interpretation and has
accepted all our conclusions up to this point, it often happens that he
comes to a standstill at this question of wish-fulfilment and asks:
“Admitting that every dream means something and that this meaning may be
discovered by employing the technique of psycho-analysis, why must it
always, in face of all the evidence to the contrary, be forced into the
formula of wish-fulfilment? Why must our thoughts at night be any less
many-sided than our thoughts by day; so that at one time a dream might
be a fulfilment of some wish; at another time, as you say yourself, the
opposite, the actualization of a dread; or, again, the expression of a
resolution, a warning, a weighing of some problem with its pro’s and
con’s, or a reproof, some prick of conscience, or an attempt to prepare
oneself for something which has to be done—and so forth? Why this
perpetual insistence upon a wish or, at the most, its opposite?”

It might be supposed that a difference of opinion on this point is a
matter of no great moment, if there is agreement on all others. Cannot
we be satisfied with having discovered the meaning of dreams and the
ways by which we can find out the meaning? We surely go back on the
advance we have made if we try to limit this meaning too strictly. But
this is not so. A misunderstanding on this head touches what is
essential to our knowledge of dreams and imperils its value for the
understanding of neuroses. Moreover, that readiness to “oblige the other
party” which has its value in business life is not only out of place but
actually harmful in scientific matters.

My first answer to the question why dreams should not be many-sided in
their meaning is the usual one in such a case: I do not know why they
should not be so, and should have no objection if they were. As far as I
am concerned, they can be so! But there is just one trifling obstacle in
the way of this wider and more convenient conception of dreams—that as a
matter of fact they are not so. My second answer would emphasize the
point that to assume that dreams represent manifold modes of thought and
intellectual operations is by no means a novel idea to myself: once, in
the history of a pathological case, I recorded a dream which occurred
three nights running and never again; and gave it as my explanation that
this dream corresponded to a resolution, the repetition of which became
unnecessary as soon as that resolution was carried out. Later on, I
published a dream which represented a confession. How is it possible for
me then to contradict myself and assert that dreams are always and only
wish-fulfilments?

I do it rather than permit a stupid misunderstanding which might cost us
the fruit of all our labours on the subject of dreams; a
misunderstanding that _confounds the dream with the latent
dream-thoughts_, and makes statements with regard to the former which
are applicable to the _latter and to the latter only_. For it is
perfectly true that dreams can represent, and be themselves replaced by,
all the modes of thought just enumerated: resolutions, warnings,
reflections, preparations or attempts to solve some problem in regard to
conduct, and so on. But when you look closely, you will recognize that
all this is true only of the latent thoughts which have been transformed
into the dream. You learn from interpretations of dreams that the
unconscious thought-processes of mankind are occupied with such
resolutions, preparations and reflections, out of which dreams are
formed by means of the dream-work. If your interest at any given moment
is not so much in the dream-work, but centres on the unconscious
thought-processes in people, you will then eliminate the dream-formation
and say of dreams themselves, what is for all practical purposes
correct, that they represent a warning, a resolve, and so on. This is
what is often done in psycho-analytic work: generally we endeavour
simply to demolish the manifest form of dreams and to substitute for it
the corresponding latent thoughts in which the dream originated.

Thus it is that we learn quite incidentally from our attempt to assess
the latent dream-thoughts that all the highly complicated mental acts we
have enumerated can be performed unconsciously—a conclusion surely as
tremendous as it is bewildering.

But to go back a little: you are quite right in speaking of dreams as
representing these various modes of thought, provided that you are quite
clear in your own minds that you are using an abbreviated form of
expression and do not imagine that the manifold variety of which you
speak is in itself part of the essential nature of _dreams_. When you
speak of “a dream” you must mean either the manifest dream, i.e. the
product of the dream-work, or at most that work itself, i.e. the mental
process which forms the latent dream-thoughts into the manifest dream.
To use the word in any other sense is a confusion of ideas which is
bound to be mischievous. If what you say is meant to apply to the latent
thoughts behind the dream, then say so plainly, and do not add to the
obscurity of the problem by your loose way of expressing yourselves. The
latent dream-thoughts are the material which is transformed by the
dream-work into the manifest dream. What makes you constantly confound
the material with the process which deals with it? If you do that, in
what way are you superior to those who know of the final product only,
without being able to explain where it comes from or how it is
constructed?

The only thing essential to the dream itself is the dream-work which has
operated upon the thought-material; and when we come to theory we have
no right to disregard this, even if in certain practical situations it
may be neglected. Further, analytic observation shows that the
dream-work never consists merely in translating the latent thoughts into
the archaic or regressive forms of expression described. On the
contrary, something is invariably added which does not belong to the
latent thoughts of the day-time, but which is the actual motive force in
dream-formation; this indispensable component being the equally
unconscious _wish_, to fulfil which the content of the dream is
transformed. In so far, then, as you are considering only the thoughts
represented in it, the dream may be any conceivable thing—a warning, a
resolve, a preparation, and so on; but besides this, it itself is always
the fulfilment of an unconscious wish, and, when you regard it as the
result of the dream-work, it is this alone. A dream then is never simply
the expression of a resolve or warning, and nothing more: in it the
resolve, or whatever it may be, is translated into the archaic form with
the assistance of an unconscious wish, and metamorphosed in such a way
as to be a fulfilment of that wish. This single characteristic, that of
fulfilling a wish, is the constant one: the other component varies; it
may indeed itself be a wish; in which event the dream represents the
fulfilment of a latent wish from our waking hours brought about by the
aid of an unconscious wish.

Now all this is quite clear to myself, but I do not know whether I have
succeeded in making it equally clear to you; and it is difficult to
prove it to you; for, on the one hand, proof requires the evidence
afforded by a careful analysis of many dreams and, on the other hand,
this, the crucial and most important point in our conception of dreams,
cannot be presented convincingly without reference to considerations
upon which we have not yet touched. Seeing how closely linked up all
phenomena are, you can hardly imagine that we can penetrate very far
into the nature of any one of them without troubling ourselves about
others of a similar nature. Since as yet we know nothing about those
phenomena which are so nearly akin to dreams—neurotic symptoms—we must
once more content ourselves with what we actually have achieved. I will
merely give you the explanation of one more example and adduce a new
consideration.

Let us take once more that dream to which we have already reverted
several times, the one about the three theatre tickets for one florin
and a half. I can assure you that I had no ulterior motive in selecting
it in the first instance for an illustration. You know what the latent
thoughts were: the vexation, after hearing that her friend had only just
become engaged, that she herself should have married so hastily;
depreciation of her husband and the idea that she could have found a
better one if only she had waited. We also know already that the wish
which made a dream out of these thoughts was the desire to “look on,” to
be able to go to the theatre—very probably an offshoot of an old
curiosity to find out at last what really does happen after marriage. It
is well known that in children this curiosity is regularly directed
towards the sexual life of the parents; that is to say, it is an
infantile impulse and, wherever it persists later in life, it has its
roots in the infantile period. But the news received on the day previous
to the dream gave no occasion for the awakening of this skoptophilia; it
only roused vexation and regret. This wish-impulse (of skoptophilia) was
not at first connected with the latent thoughts, and the results of the
dream-interpretation could have been used by the analysis without taking
it into consideration at all. But again, the vexation was not in itself
capable of producing a dream: no dream could be formed out of the
thought: “It was folly to be in such a hurry to marry” until that
thought had stirred up the early wish to see at last what happened after
marriage. Then this wish formed the dream-content, substituting for
marriage the going to the theatre; and the form was that of the
fulfilment of the earlier wish: “Now I may go to the theatre and look at
all that we have never been allowed to see; and you may not. I am
married and you have got to wait.” In this way the actual situation was
transformed into its opposite and an old triumph substituted for the
recent discomfiture; and incidentally, satisfaction both of a ‘gazing’
impulse and of one of egoistic rivalry was brought about. It is this
latter satisfaction which determines the manifest content of the dream;
for in it she is actually sitting in the theatre, while her friend
cannot get in. Those portions of the dream-content behind which the
latent thoughts still conceal themselves are to be found in the form of
inappropriate and incomprehensible modifications of the gratifying
situation. The business of _interpretation_ is to put aside those
features in the whole which merely represent a wish-fulfilment and to
reconstruct the painful latent dream-thoughts from these indications.

The consideration which I said I wished to call to your notice is
intended to direct your attention to these latent dream-thoughts now
brought into prominence. I must beg you not to forget that, first, the
dreamer is unconscious of them; secondly that they are quite reasonable
and coherent, so that we can understand them as comprehensible reactions
to whatever stimulus has given rise to the dream; and, thirdly, that
they may have the value of any mental impulse or intellectual operation.
I will designate these thoughts more strictly now than hitherto as _the
residue from the previous day_; the dreamer may acknowledge them or not.
I then distinguish between this ‘residue’ and ‘latent dream-thoughts,’
so that, as we have been accustomed to do all along, I will call
everything which we learn from the interpretation of the dream ‘the
latent dream-thoughts,’ while ‘the residue from the previous day’ is
only a part of the latent dream-thoughts. Then our conception of what
happens is this: something has been added to the residue from the
previous day, something which also belongs to the unconscious, a strong
but repressed wish-impulse, and it is this alone which makes the
formation of a dream possible. The wish-impulse, acting upon the
‘residue,’ creates the other part of the latent dream-thoughts, that
part which no longer need appear rational or comprehensible from the
point of view of our waking life.

To illustrate the relation between the residue and the unconscious wish
I have elsewhere made use of a comparison which I cannot do better than
repeat here. Every business undertaking requires a capitalist to defray
the expenses and an entrepreneur who has the idea and understands how to
carry it out. Now the part of the capitalist in dream-formation is
always and only played by the unconscious wish; it supplies the
necessary fund of mental energy for it: the entrepreneur is the residue
from the previous day, determining the manner of the expenditure. It is,
of course, quite possible for the capitalist himself to have the idea
and the special knowledge needed, or for the entrepreneur himself to
have capital. This simplifies the practical situation but makes the
theory of it more difficult. In economics we discriminate between the
man in his function of capitalist and the same man in his capacity as
entrepreneur; and this distinction restores the fundamental situation
upon which our comparison is based. The same variations are to be found
in the formation of dreams: I leave you to follow them out for
yourselves.

We cannot go any further at this point; for I think it likely that a
disturbing thought has long since occurred to you and it deserves a
hearing. You may ask: “Is the so-called ‘residue’ really unconscious in
the sense in which the wish necessary for the formation of the dream is
unconscious?” Your suspicion is justified: this is the salient point in
the whole matter. They are not both unconscious in the same sense. The
dream-wish belongs to a different type of UNCONSCIOUS, which, as we have
seen, has its roots in the infantile period and is furnished with
special mechanisms. It is very expedient to distinguish the two types of
“unconscious” from one another by speaking of them in different terms.
But, all the same, we will rather wait until we have familiarized
ourselves with the phenomena of the neuroses. If our conception of the
existence of any kind of unconscious be already regarded as fantastic,
what will people say if we admit that to reach our solution we have had
to assume two kinds?

Let us break off at this point. Once more you have heard only an
incomplete statement; but is it not a hopeful thought that this
knowledge will be carried further, either by ourselves or by those who
come after us? And have not we ourselves learnt enough that is new and
startling?




                           FIFTEENTH LECTURE
               DOUBTFUL POINTS AND CRITICAL OBSERVATIONS


We will not leave the subject of dreams without dealing with the most
common doubts and uncertainties arising in connection with the novel
ideas and conceptions we have been discussing: those of you who have
followed these lectures attentively will have collected some material of
the kind.

1. You may have received an impression that even with strict adherence
to technique our work of dream-interpretation leaves so much room for
uncertainty that reliable translation of manifest dreams into their
latent dream-thoughts will be thereby frustrated. You will urge first
that one never knows whether any particular element in a dream is to be
understood literally or symbolically, since things employed as symbols
do not thereby cease to be themselves. Where there is no objective
evidence to decide the question the interpretation on that particular
point will be left to be arbitrarily determined by the interpreter.
Further, since in the dream-work opposites coincide, it is in every
instance uncertain whether a specific dream-element is to be understood
in a positive or a negative sense, as itself or as its opposite—another
opportunity for the interpreter to exercise a choice. Thirdly, on
account of the frequency with which inversion of every kind is employed
in dreams, it is open to him to assume whenever he chooses that such an
inversion has taken place. Finally you will point to having heard that
one is seldom certain that the interpretation arrived at is the only
possible one, and that there is danger of overlooking another perfectly
admissible interpretation of the same dream. In these circumstances, you
will conclude, the discretion of the interpreter has a latitude that
seems incompatible with any objective certainty in the result. Or you
may also assume that the fault does not lie in dreams themselves, but
that something erroneous in our conceptions and premises produces the
unsatisfactory character of our interpretations.

All that you say is undeniable and yet I do not think it justifies
either of your conclusions: that dream-interpretation as practised by us
is at the mercy of the interpreter’s arbitrary decisions or that the
inadequacy of the results calls in question the correctness of our
procedure. If for the “arbitrary decision” of the interpreter you will
substitute his skill, his experience and his understanding, then I am
with you. This kind of personal factor is of course indispensable,
especially when interpretation is difficult; it is just the same in
other scientific work, however; it can’t be helped that one man will use
any given technique less well, or apply it better, than another. The
impression of arbitrariness made, for example, by the interpretation of
symbols is corrected by the reflection that as a rule the connection of
the dream-thoughts with one another, and of the dream with the life of
the dreamer and the whole mental situation at the time of the dream,
points directly to one of all the possible interpretations and renders
all the rest useless. The conclusion that the imperfect character of the
interpretations proceeds from fallacious hypotheses loses its force when
consideration shows that, on the contrary, the ambiguity or
indefiniteness of dreams is a quality which we should necessarily expect
in them.

Let us call to mind our statement that the dream-work undertakes a
translation of the dream-thoughts into a primitive mode of expression,
analogous to hieroglyphics. Now all such primitive systems of expression
are necessarily accompanied by ambiguity and indefiniteness; but we
should not on that account be justified in doubting their
practicability. You know that the coincidence of opposites in the
dream-work is analogous to what is called the antithetical sense of
primal words in the oldest languages. The philologist, R. Abel, to whom
we owe this information, writing in 1884, begs us not on any account to
imagine that there was any ambiguity in what one person said to another
by means of ambivalent words of this sort. On the contrary, intonation,
gestures and the whole context can have left no doubt whatever which of
the two opposites the speaker had in mind to convey. In writing where
gestures are absent the addition of little pictorial signs, not meant to
receive separate oral expression, replaced them: e.g. a drawing of a
little man, either crouching or standing upright, according as the
ambiguous _ken_ of the hieroglyphic meant “weak” or “strong.” So that
misunderstanding was avoided in spite of the ambiguity of sounds and
signs.

In ancient systems of expression, for instance, in the scripts of the
oldest languages, indefiniteness of various kinds is found with a
frequency which we should not tolerate in our writings to-day. Thus in
many Semitic writings only the consonants of the words appear: the
omitted vowels have to be supplied by the reader from his knowledge and
from the context. Hieroglyphic writing follows a similar principle,
although not exactly the same; and this is the reason why nothing is
known of the pronunciation of ancient Egyptian. There are besides other
kinds of indefiniteness in the sacred writings of the Egyptians: for
example, it is left to the writer’s choice to inscribe the pictures from
right to left or from left to right. To be able to read them, we have to
remember that we must be guided by the direction of the faces of the
figures, birds, and so forth. But it was also open to the writer to set
the pictures in vertical columns and, in the case of inscriptions on
smaller objects, he was led by considerations of what was pleasing to
the eye, and of the space at his disposal, to introduce still further
alterations in the arrangement of the signs. The most confusing feature
in hieroglyphic script is that there is no spacing between the words.
The pictures are all placed at equal intervals on the page, and it is
generally impossible to know whether any given sign goes with the
preceding one or forms the beginning of a new word. In Persian cuneiform
writing, on the other hand, a slanting sign is used to separate the
words.

The Chinese language, both spoken and written, is exceedingly ancient
but is still used to-day by four hundred million people. Don’t suppose
that I understand it at all; I only obtained some information about it
because I hoped to find in it analogies to the kinds of indefiniteness
occurring in dreams; nor was I disappointed in my expectation, for
Chinese is so full of uncertainties as positively to terrify one. As is
well known, it consists of a number of syllabic sounds which are
pronounced singly or doubled in combination. One of the chief dialects
has about four hundred of these sounds, and since the vocabulary of this
dialect is estimated at somewhere about four thousand words it is
evident that every sound has an average of ten different meanings—some
fewer, but some all the more. For this reason there are a whole series
of devices to escape ambiguity, for the context alone will not show
which of the ten possible meanings of the syllable the speaker wishes to
convey to the hearer. Amongst these devices is the combining of two
sounds into a single word and the use of four different “tones” in which
these syllables may be spoken. For purposes of our comparison a still
more interesting fact is that this language is practically without
grammar: it is impossible to say of any of the one-syllabled words
whether it is a noun, a verb or an adjective; and, further, there are no
inflections to show gender, number, case, tense or mood. The language
consists, as we may say, of the raw material only; just as our
thought-language is resolved into its raw material by the dream-work
omitting to express the relations in it. Wherever there is any
uncertainty in Chinese the decision is left to the intelligence of the
listener, who is guided by the context. I made a note of a Chinese
saying, which literally translated runs thus: “Little what see, much
what wonderful.” This is simple enough to understand. It may mean: “The
less a man has seen, the more he finds to wonder at,” or “There is much
to wonder at for the man who has seen little.” Naturally there is no
occasion to choose between these two translations which differ only in
grammatical construction. We are assured that in spite of these
uncertainties the Chinese language is a quite exceptionally good medium
of expression; so it is clear that indefiniteness does not necessarily
lead to ambiguity.

Now we must certainly admit that the position of affairs is far less
favourable in regard to the mode of expression in dreams than it is with
these ancient tongues and scripts; for these latter were originally
designed as a means of communication; that is, they were intended to be
understood, no matter what ways or means they had to employ. But just
this character is lacking to dreams: their object is not to tell anyone
anything; they are not a means of communication; on the contrary, it is
important to them not to be understood. So we ought not to be surprised
or misled if the result is that a number of the ambiguities and
uncertainties in dreams cannot be determined. The only certain piece of
knowledge gained from our comparison is that this indefiniteness (which
people would like to make use of as an argument against the accuracy of
our dream-interpretations) is rather to be recognized as a regular
characteristic of all primitive systems of expression.

Practice and experience alone can determine the extent to which dreams
can in actual fact be understood. My own opinion is that this is
possible to a very great extent; and a comparison of the results
obtained by properly-trained analysts confirms my view. It is well known
that the lay public, even in scientific circles, delights to make a
parade of superior scepticism in the face of the difficulties and
uncertainties which beset a scientific achievement; I think they are
wrong in so doing. You may possibly not at all know that the same thing
happened at the time when the Babylonian and Assyrian inscriptions were
being deciphered. There was a point at which public opinion was active
in declaring that the men deciphering the cuneiform writing were victims
of a chimera and that the whole business of investigation was a fraud.
But in the year 1857 the Royal Asiatic Society made a conclusive test.
They challenged four of the most distinguished men engaged in this
branch of research—Rawlinson, Hincks, Fox Talbot and Oppert—to send to
the Society in sealed envelopes independent translations of a
newly-discovered inscription, and, after comparing the four versions,
they were able to announce that there was sufficient agreement between
the four to justify belief in what had been achieved and confidence in
further progress. The mockery of the learned laity then gradually came
to an end, and certainty in the reading of cuneiform documents has
advanced enormously since then.

2. A second series of objections is closely connected with an impression
which you also have probably not escaped; namely, that a number of the
solutions achieved by our method of dream-interpretation seem strained,
specious, “dragged in,”—in other words, forced, or even comical or
joking. These criticisms are so frequent that I will take at random the
last that has come to my ears. Now listen: a head-master in
Switzerland—that free country—was recently asked to resign his post on
account of his interest in psycho-analysis. He protested and a Berne
paper published the decision of the school authorities on his case. I
shall quote a few sentences from the article which refer to
psycho-analysis: “Further, we are amazed at the far-fetched and
factitious character of many of the examples given in the said book by
Dr. Pfister of Zurich.... It is indeed a matter for surprise that the
head-master of a Training College should accept so credulously all these
assertions and such specious evidence.” These sentences purport to be
the final opinion of “One who judges calmly.” I am much more inclined to
think this “calm” factitious. Let us examine these remarks more closely
in the expectation that a certain amount of reflection and knowledge of
the subject will do no harm, even to a “calm judgement.”

It is really quite refreshing to see how swiftly and unerringly anyone
relying merely on his first impressions can arrive at an opinion on some
critical question of psychology in its more abstruse aspects. The
interpretations seem to him far-fetched and strained, and do not commend
themselves to him; consequently, they are wrong and the whole business
is rubbish. Such critics never give even a passing thought to the
possibility that there may be good reasons why the interpretations are
bound to convey this very impression—a thought which would lead to the
further question what these good reasons are.

The circumstance which calls forth this criticism is essentially related
to the effect of displacement, which you have learnt to know as the most
powerful instrument in the service of the dream-censorship. With its aid
the substitute-formations which we call allusions are created; but these
allusions are of a kind not easy to recognize as such; nor is it easy to
discover the thought proper by working back from them, for they are
connected with it by the most extraordinary and unusual extrinsic
associations. But the whole matter throughout concerns things which are
meant to be hidden, intended to be concealed: that is exactly the object
of the dream-censorship. We must not expect, though, to find something
that has been hidden by looking in the very place where it ordinarily
belongs. The frontier surveillance authorities nowadays are a good deal
more cunning in this respect than the Swiss school authorities; for they
are not content with examining portfolios and letter-cases when hunting
for documents and plans; but consider the possibility that spies and
smugglers may conceal anything compromising about their persons, in
places where it is most difficult to detect and where such things
certainly do not belong, for example, between the double soles of their
boots. If the concealed articles are found there, it is certainly true
that they have been “dragged” to light, but they are none the less a
very good “find.”

In admitting the possibility that the connection between a latent
dream-element and its manifest substitute may appear most remote and
extraordinary, sometimes even comical or joking, we are guided by our
wide experience of instances in which we did not as a rule find the
meaning ourselves. It is often impossible to arrive at such
interpretations by our own efforts: no sane person could guess the
bridge connecting the two. The dreamer either solves the riddle
straightaway by a direct association (_he_ can do it because it is in
his mind that the substitute-formation originated); or else he
provides so much material that there is no longer any need for special
penetration in order to solve it—the solution thrusts itself upon us
as inevitable. If the dreamer does not help us in either of these two
ways the manifest element in question will remain for ever
incomprehensible. Let me give you one more instance of this kind which
happened recently. A patient of mine lost her father during the course
of the treatment, after which she seized every opportunity to bring
him back to life in her dreams. In one of these her father appeared in
a certain connection otherwise not applicable and said: “_It is
quarter past eleven, it is half past eleven, it is quarter to
twelve_.” For the interpretation of this curious detail she could only
provide the association that her father was pleased when his older
children were punctual at the midday meal. This certainly fitted in
with the dream-element, but it threw no light on its origin. The
situation which had just been reached in the treatment gave good
grounds for the suspicion that a carefully-suppressed critical
antagonism to her much loved and honoured father had played a part in
this dream. Following out her further associations, apparently quite
remote from the dream, she told how she had heard a long discussion of
psychological questions on the day before and a relative had said:
“Primitive man (_Urmensch_) survives in all of us.” Now a light dawns
on us. Here was again a splendid opportunity for her to imagine that
her dead father survived, and so in the dream she made him a
“clock-man” (_Uhrmensch_), telling the quarters up to the time of the
midday meal.

The likeness to a pun in this cannot be ignored, and as a matter of fact
it has often happened that a dreamer’s pun has been ascribed to the
interpreter; there are yet other examples in which it is not at all easy
to decide whether we are dealing with a joke or a dream. But you will
remember that the same sort of doubt arose with some slips of the
tongue. A man related as a dream that he and his uncle were sitting in
the latter’s _auto_ (automobile) and his uncle kissed him. The dreamer
himself instantly volunteered the interpretation: it meant
“_auto-erotism_” (a term used in our theory of the libido, signifying
gratification obtained without any external love-object). Now was this
man allowing himself a joke at our expense and pretending that a pun
which occurred to him was part of a dream? I do not think so: he really
did dream it. But where does this bewildering resemblance between dreams
and jokes come from? At one time this question took me somewhat out of
my way, for it necessitated my making a thorough investigation into the
question of wit itself. This led to the conclusion that wit originates
as follows: a preconscious train of thought is for a moment left to a
process of unconscious elaboration, from which it emerges in the form of
a witticism. While under the influence of the unconscious it is subject
to the mechanisms there operative—to condensation and displacement; that
is to say, to the same processes as we found at work in the dream-work;
and the similarity sometimes found between dreams and wit is to be
ascribed to this character common to both. But the unintentional “dream
joke” does not amuse us as does an ordinary witticism; a deeper study of
wit may show you why this is so. The “dream joke” strikes us as a poor
form of wit; it does not make us laugh, it leaves us cold.

Now in this we are following the path of the ancient method of
dream-interpretation, which has given us, besides much that is useless,
many a valuable example of interpretation upon which we ourselves could
not improve. I will tell you a dream of historic importance which is
related in slightly different versions by Plutarch and Artemidorus of
Daldis, the dreamer being Alexander the Great. When he was laying siege
to the city of Tyre, which was putting up an obstinate resistance (B.C.
322), he dreamt one night that he saw a dancing satyr. The
dream-interpreter Aristandros, who accompanied the army on its
campaigns, interpreted this dream by dividing the word “satyros” into σὰ
Τύρος (“Tyre is thine”), and prophesied from this the king’s victory
over the city. This interpretation decided Alexander to continue the
siege and eventually the city fell. The interpretation, factitious as it
seems, was undoubtedly the right one.

3. I can well imagine that you will be especially impressed on being
told that even people who have long studied the interpretation of dreams
in the course of their work as psycho-analysts have raised objections to
our conception of dreams. It would indeed have been exceptional if so
excellent an opportunity for new mistakes had been let slip; and so
assertions have been made, due to confusion of ideas and based on
unjustifiable generalizations, which are hardly less incorrect than the
medical conception of dreams. One of these statements you know already:
that dreams deal with attempts at adaptation to the situation at the
moment and with the solution of future problems; in other words, that
they pursue a “prospective tendency” or aim (A. Maeder). We have already
demonstrated that this statement rests upon a confusion between dreams
and the latent dream-thoughts and ignores the process of dream-work. If
those who speak of this “prospective tendency” mean thereby to
characterize the unconscious mental activity to which the latent
thoughts belong, then, on the one hand, they tell us nothing new and, on
the other hand, the description is not exhaustive; for unconscious
mental activity occupies itself with many other things besides
preparation for the future. There seems to be a much worse confusion
behind the assurance that the “death clause” may be found underlying
every dream; I am not quite clear what this formula is intended to mean,
but I suspect that behind it the dream is confounded with the whole
personality of the dreamer.

An unjustifiable generalization, based on a few striking examples, is
contained in the statement that every dream admits of two kinds of
interpretation: one of the kind we have described, the so-called
“psycho-analytic” interpretation, and the other the so-called
“anagogic,” which disregards the instinctive tendencies and aims at a
representation of the higher mental functions (H. Silberer); there are
dreams of this kind, but you will seek in vain to extend this conception
to include even a majority of dreams. After all you have heard, the
statement that all dreams are to be interpreted bisexually, as a
combination of two tendencies which may be called male and female (A.
Adler), will seem to you quite incomprehensible. Here again, single
dreams of this sort do of course occur and later on you may learn that
their structure is similar to that of certain hysterical symptoms. I
mention all these discoveries of new general characteristics of dreams
in order to warn you against them, or at least to leave you in no doubt
about my own opinion of them.

4. At one time the objective value of research into dreams seemed to be
discredited by the fact that patients treated analytically appeared to
suit the content of their dreams to the favourite theories of their
doctors, one class dreaming mainly of sexual impulses, and another of
impulses for mastery, others again even of rebirth (W. Stekel). The
force of this observation is weakened by the reflection that people
dreamed dreams before there was any such thing as psycho-analytic
treatment to influence their dreams and that the patients undergoing
treatment nowadays also used to dream before they began it. The actual
fact in this supposedly new observation is soon shown to be self-evident
and of no consequence for the theory of dreams. The residue from the
previous day which gives rise to dreams is a residue from the great
interests of waking life. If the physician’s words and the stimuli which
he gives have become of importance to the patient they then enter into
whatever constitutes the residue and can act as mental stimuli for
dream-formation, just like other interests of affective value roused on
the preceding day which have not subsided; they operate in the same way
as bodily stimuli which affect the sleeper during sleep. Like these
other factors inciting dreams, the trains of thought roused by the
physician can appear in the manifest dream-content or be revealed in the
latent thoughts. We know indeed that dreams can be experimentally
produced, or, to speak more accurately, a part of the dream-material can
be thus introduced into the dream. In influencing his patients thus the
analyst plays a part no different from that of an experimenter, like
Mourly Void, who placed in certain positions the limbs of the person
upon whom he experimented.

We can often influence what a man shall dream _about_, but never _what_
he will dream; for the mechanism of the dream-work and the unconscious
dream-wish are inaccessible to external influence of any sort. We
realized, when we were considering dreams arising out of bodily stimuli,
that in the reaction to the bodily or mental stimuli brought to bear
upon the dreamer the peculiarity and independence of dream-life is
clearly seen. The criticism I have just discussed which tends to cast a
doubt upon the objectivity of dream investigation is again an assertion
based upon confounding, this time confounding dreams with—their
material.

I wanted to tell you as much as this about the problems of dreams. You
will guess that I have passed over a great deal and will have discovered
for yourselves that my treatment of nearly every point has necessarily
been incomplete; but this is due to the phenomena of dreams being so
closely connected with those of the neuroses. Our plan was to study
dreams as an introduction to the study of the neuroses and it was
certainly a better one than beginning the other way about; but since
dreams prepare us for comprehension of the neuroses, so also can a
correctly-formed estimate of dreams be acquired only after some
knowledge of neurotic manifestations has been gained.

I do not know how you may think about it, but I can assure you that I do
not regret having taken up so much of your interest and of the time at
our disposal in the consideration of problems connected with dreams. I
know no other way by which one can so speedily arrive at conviction of
the correctness of those statements by which psycho-analysis stands or
falls. It requires strenuous work for many months, and even years, to
demonstrate that the symptoms in a case of neurotic illness have a
meaning, serve a purpose, and arise from the patient’s experiences in
life. On the other hand, a few hours’ effort may be enough to show these
things in some dream which at first seemed utterly confused and
incomprehensible, and in this way to confirm all the premises upon which
psycho-analysis rests—the existence of unconscious mental processes, the
special mechanisms which they obey, and the instinctive propelling
forces which are expressed by them. And when we remember how
far-reaching is the analogy in the structure of dreams to that of
neurotic symptoms and, with that, reflect how rapid is the
transformation of a dreamer into a wide-awake, reasonable human being,
we acquire an assurance that the neuroses too depend only upon an
alteration in the balance of the forces at work in mental life.
